          ^ ilHo j4-

LIBRARY OF THE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY
                 PRINCETON, N. J.
                        PRESENTED BY

              DR. F.L. PATTON

Division  ^ .-¥5 "-^ » »
Section.
          ,K37
The Samaritan PENTATEucH-EoLr- at NAni,ors.

   (Onr/innl height, e.rclvfthig rol/erx. nhovl \:,n>.)
                                                                         'r

                    IViaR 16 1914

              ./>^                                                       A

OUE  BIBLE

     AND THE

ANCIEOT MAI^USCEIPTS

IfDistory ot tbe Zcit auD its translations

        FREDERIC G. KENYON, M.A., D.Litt.

Hon. Ph.D. of Halle University; Late Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford

                    WITH 26 FACSIMILES

       EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE

LONDON--GREAT NEW STREET, FLEET STREET, E.G.

    Edixbl'rgii, Glasgow, Meluourne, Sydxev, and New York
                                         1895
                   LONDON:
     EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE,

              Her Majesty's Printers,
bOWNS PARK ROAD, HACKNETi K.E,
                 PEEFACE.

ri^HE Bible has a twofold history, internal and external.

 -*- The internal history deals with the character of its
narrative and its teaching, as a revelation of God and of
God's will ; the external history tells how and when the
several books were written, and how they have been
preserved to us. The former treats of the Bible in its
divine, the latter in its human, aspect. The former is
unique, differing not merely in detail, but in kind, from the
history of any other book ; the latter is shared by the
Bible with every other book that ever was written. It is,
of course, its internal history which is of supreme value

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;

but the very greatness of this value gives to the external
history of the Bible a special interest and importance
above that of all other books. If the Bible claims so
unparalleled a pre-eminence, it is of the lirst consequence to

us to know when and how it was written, whether the

several books of it are authentic, and whether they have

been faithfully handed down to U8 through the centuries

which separate us from the tim«? of their origin.

     The present volum.C! deals solely with the latter part of

the Bible's external history, the transmission of the sacred
                                              ;

IV  PREFACE.

text. It is a subject upon which very much has been

written, and each section of it has engaged the attention

My and occupied the lives of many scholars.   object has

been to condense within the limits of a moderate volume

the principal results at which these specialists have arrived,

so as to furnish the reader who is not himself a specialist

in textual criticism with a concise history of the Bible text,

and to enable him to form an intelligent opinion on the textual

questions which continually present themselves to the Bible

student. In this attempt I have necessarily been indebted

to the labours of others at every turn. To acknowledge this

indebtedness in every case, to trace every statement to its

original owner, would be an endless task, and would over-

load this book with notes to an extent quite unsuitable to

its character ; but it may be of some use to mention the
principal authorities whom I have followed in each part of

the history. To Strack, Davidson, Driver, Cornill, and

Buhl on the Old Testament generally ; to Field, Lagarde,

Ceriani, and Swete on the Septuagint ; to Scrivener,

Gregory, and Hort on the New Testament ; to the writers

in the second volume of Scrivener's Introduction (4th

edition, by Miller) on the versions of the New Testament

to Wordsworth, White, and Berger on the Vulgate ; to

Skeat, Madden, and especially Westcott on the history of

-- my the English Bi).)le I desire to record  obligations in the

strongest terms of respect. I have not, however, confined

myself to the vvriuTS here mentioned, but have tried

throughout to find and consult all the best authorities, so

as to present in this voluive a readable summary of the

present results of the best cruieism. I hope also that I

may have gained something from an acquaintance with the

Biblical manuscripts in the British Museum.
                                        PREFACE.

    This volume is especially intended for those who study

the Bible in English, and in referriiig to details of textual

criticism I have consequently had in my mind the only

edition of the English Bible in which these details
are made accessible to the ordinary reader, namely the
Variorum Bible published by Messrs. Eyre and Spottis-

woode. I hope, however, that it may also be found useful
by students who are beginning to make acquaintance with
the textual criticism of the Septuagint or New Testament
in their original language, and who use such editions as the

Cambridge Septuagint edited by Prof. Swete, or the Oxford
Greek Testament edited by Prof. Sanday. To any of these
editions this volume may, in the chapters relating to those
parts of the subject, serve as a companion ; but indepen-

dently of such use, it is intended to give the reader a
general knowledge of the textual history of the Bible,
from the time at which the several books were written
 until their appearance in our English Bibles to-day.

     With regard to the plates, a few words of explanation
are necessary. In presenting facsimiles of large manu-
scripts within the compass of a small page, two alternatives

are possible. One may either reproduce a small portion of
the original page in its full size, or one may give the whole

page (or a large part of it) on a reduced scale. There is
something to be said for either course; but I have preferred
the latter, on the ground that it gives a better idea of the
general appearance of the manuscript, and also that it
enables one to point out more examples of the character-
istics of the manuscripts and the errors of the scribes. I
have, however, in every case stated the original size of the
page reproduced, and (in cases where the whole page

S 276A.  b
Vi                       TEFFACE.

cannot be given) of the part reproduced ; and it is open to
anyone to counteract the reduction by the use of a magni-

fying glass. It should be observed that in many cases the

greater part of the difference between the whole page and
the part reproduced is accounted for by the margins. Use
has been made, in several instances, of the plates published
by the Palseographical Society, with the permission of the
editors ; but wherever it has been possible I have tried to
give pages which especially illustrate the peculiarities of
the manuscript in question or some important detail of

textual criticism.

     In a book which covers so much ground on which so
much labour has been bestowed, it is useless to hope that
there should be no room for differences of opinion and
no errors of detail ; but I shall be very grateful for any

corrections which may serve to make my work less un-

worthy of the high subject with which it ventures to deal.

                                              F. G. K.

Department of Manuscripts,
                             Ekitisu Museum.

    2bth October, 1895.
                                              T                                        --

                                                       CONTENTS.

                                                          CHAPTER I.

                                              Variations in the Bible Text.                        page

-- -- -- The existence of variations. Examples. Their origin. Mistakes of
-- -- copyists: (1) Errors of hand and eye. (2) Errors of mind.
                                                                                                   ,_

-- (3) Errors of deliberate alteration. Early MSS. the most free from
-- -- error. Method of recovering the true text. Textual errors do not

endanger doctrine ,                                    .  .       .        .  .  .  ,  .1-11

                                                          CHAPTER II.

                         The Authorities foe the Bible Text,

-- -- -- The Authorities classified. 1. Manuscripts. 2. Versions. 3. Quota-

tions in the Fathers                                   .  .       .        .  .  .  ,              12-16

                                                          CHAPTER III.

         The Original Manuscripts of the Bible.

-- Writing in early times : the Tell el-Amarna tablets. Writing in
-- -- ...-- ... Babylonia. In Egypt.

manuscripts of the Bible
                                                          In Palestine.       Form of the original

                                                                                                                 17-22

                                                          CHAPTER IV.

                                                       The Hebrew Text.

-- -- The Hebrew characters. he Hebrew 1angii!\ge. Classification of the
   -- books of the Old Testament into three groups. These groups

represent three stages in the formation of the Hebrew Canon :

(1) The  Law                                  (2) The  Prophets;  (3) The  Hagiographa.--Dates of
                                           ;

these stages, from which the care for the text may be supposed to                                  <y^ >

-- -- commence. Stages in the history of the Hebrew text. 1. The                                                                '
-- -- -- Targums. 2. The Talmud. 3. The Massoretes. The extant
-- Hebrew text entirely Massoretic. The text, once fixed, copied with

-- extreme care. -The extant MSS. ^mparatively late, but faithful.

-- -- Causes of disappearance of older copies. 3^h©~extant MSS., how
-- -- classified. Description of_-tbe chief MSS. The printed text.

Summary : the^extant MSS. contain a faithful representation of a
...... text which can be traced back to about a.d. 100 ; but they do not
enable us to follow it further                                                             23-42
         --                                                                           ----:

         TUl                               CONTENTS.

        ^--                                  CHAPTEE V.                                                            page

                          The Ancient Veksions of the Old Testament.

         The versions the only means for arriving at a pre-Massoretic text .             43-92

             -- -- -- § 1. The Samaritan Pentateuch. Its origin.

              -- ...... character. Its manuscripts
                                                                     Its discovery.  Its

                                                                                         44-48

             § 2j--The Septuagint and other Greek versions. Origin of the

                -- -- Septuagint. Its contents. Becomes the Eible of the Christian
               -- -- I

                 /Church. Consequently rejected by the Jews. Rival translations

                    in the 2nd century: (1) Aquila, (2) Theodotion, (3) Symmaehus.

                    -- -- Origen's Hexapla: its great eifect on the Septuagint. Editions

             ry of the Septuagint in the 3rd century : (1) Eusebius, (2) Lucian,
         ^
                    -- (3) Hesychius. Present state of the Septuagint: The extant MSS.
         -- -- vX ^~)
^x                        The printed editions. Eeconstruction of the ancient editions

^v t^\              -- from the^SS. Ili*-Septuagint fand Massoretic texts         .       48-73

^ ^ ^^ -- -- J                                                 -- The Syriac version. The Coptic
             § 3.-- Other Eastern Versions.                 -- -- v- ersi;o.^n_.

    -^              versi; ons.  The rr^i ETit.h!-i:opi:c~        The rr^u^ Gr^o^tlhV^iic^ and,i other .^4-'U.^«.

                    versions .   .      .                   .  .  .     ...                                        73-77

             § 4.--The Latin Versions.     (a) The Old Latin Version.-- (i) The
                                                                                                          77-83
                    Vulgate

             § 5.-- Condition of the Old Testament Text. Summary of the

                    -- evidence of the versions. Most of them too late to be of use.
                    -- Evidence of the Samaritan Pentateuch. The real issue : Septua-
                    -- gint V. Massoretic. The Hebrew text certainly corrupt. in places

                    -- but the Septuagint not always trustworthy. Additions and
                    -- ..... corruptions in Septuagint. Deliberate falsification of Hebrew
                    text not proven.-- Summing-up                                                                  83-92

                                           CHAPTER VI.

                    ly**         The Text of the New Testament.

         -- The -original MSS. of the N. T. Circumstances under which the early
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
        L/'                                                                                                        |
                    -- -- copies were written. Careful copying begins in the 4th century. I
      ^V
                    ------ -- Transmission from 4th to 15th century. The earliest p^rinted texts.
      X'"           -- -- -- ^
                 '  The " received " text. Its deficiencies. Materials for correcting I

    ,

     ^*             it: the chief manuscripts (uncial and cursive), versions, and J
->
                    -- -- Fathers. Grouping of authorities. Westcott and Hort's theory.

                    Distinction of Syrian, Western, Alexandrian, and Neutral groups.
                    ...--...... Importance of this theory.

                    considered
                                                               -- Objections to it. The objections

                                                                                                                     93-115

                                    Appendix to Chapter VI.

         The chief modern editions of the New Testament              ,     .         . 116-120
                                                                         --

                 CONTENTS.                                                   ix

                 CHAPTER VII.

The Manuscripts of the New Testament.                                        page

-- -- Codex Sinaiticus (H). Codex Alexandrinus (A). Codex Vaticanus (B).           fl vW-
   -- -- -- Codex Ephrsemi (C). Codex Bezae (D). Codex Claromontanus

(Da).--Other uncial MSS.-- Cursive MSS                                                                                                 "

                                                                121-150

                 CHAPTER VIII.

The Ancient Versions of the New Testament.

-- § 1 . The Eastern Versions. I. Syriae Versions. The Old or
   -- -- Curetonian Syriae. The Peshitto. The Philoxenian or Hark-
-- -- leian Syriae. The Palestinian Syriae. II. Coptic Versions. The
-- -- Memphitic or Bohairic. The Thebaic or Sahidic. The Fayyumic,                 ^T
-- Middle Egyptian, and Akhmimic Versions. III. Other Eastern
-- -- -- Versions. Armenian. Gothic. Ethiopic. Arabic, etc.
                                                             .           151-165

-- -- § 2. The Western Versions, (a) The Old Latin. Various forms of
.,,,.... it.--The principal MSS.--(6) The Vulgate.--The principal MSS.--
Codex Amiatinus                                                          165-173

                 CHAPTER IX.

                           The Vuloate in the Middle Ages.                   H ''"X-^u^
                                                                                                                '
-- Importance of the Vulgate as the Bible of the West. Simultaneous use
   -- -- of Old Latin and Vulgate. Consequent mixture of tests. Spanish
   -- -- and Irish MSS. Irish illuminations in English MSS. Texts of
   -- -- English MSS. derived from Italy. The Lindisfarne Gospels.

       Eminence of English scholarship in the 8th and 9th centuries.

    -- Charlemagne's eflfbrt to improve the Vulgate. Alcuin's revision.
   -- -- The Golden Gospels. Theodulf's revision. The school of St. Gall.
   -- -- Subsequent deterioration. Revision in the 13th century by the
    -- -- University of Paris. The earliest printed Latin Bibles. The

Sixtine Vulgate.--The Clementine Vulgate  .      .           . 174-188

                 CHAPTER X.

                 The English Manuscript Bibles.

-- -- The conversion of England. Caedmon's Bible paraphrase. The Psalter
-- -- -- of Aldhelm. Bede. Alfred. Interlinear glosses in Latin Bibles.
-- The Gospels of the 10th century. JElfric's Old Testament.

-- Progress suspended by the Norman Conquest. Verse translations in
-- -- the 13th century. Translations of the Psalms. Revival of religion
-- -- -- in the 14th century. Wyclifife. The earlier Wycliffite Bible. The
-- later Wycliffite Bible. Theory that the Wycliffite Bible is not really
-- .... Wycliffe's. Examination of the theory
                                                                         189-208
                                                            --

       CONTENTS.

       CHAPTER XI.

       The English Printed Bible.                                           page

-- The invention of printing and the revival of learning. The Reformation.
   -- -- The struggle for a translation of the Bible. (1) Tyndale's New
   -- -- Testament, 1525. His Pentateuch, 1530. Revised New Testament,
   -- 1534, 1535. Tyndale's Bible the direct ancestor of the Authorised

Version.-- (2) Coverdale's Bible, 1535.--(3) Matthew's Bible, 1537.

--(4) The Great Bible, 1539-1541.-- (5) Taverner's Bible, 1539.--

Progress suspended during reigns of Edward VI. and Mary.

(6) The Geneva Bible, 1557-1560.-- (7) The Bishops' Bible, 1568.--

(8) The Rheims and Douai Bible, 1582-1609.-- (9) The Authorised

-- -- Version, 1611. Its excellence and influence. Acceptance of the
-- Authorised Version. Causes necessitating a revision in our own
-- -- -- time. (10) The Revised Version. Its characteristics. Changes in
-- -- -- test. Changes in interpretation. Changes in language. Summary.
-- ..... Reception of the Revised Version
                                                            209-245

       Appendix.

Specimens of the English translations of the Bible .  .  .  247, 248

Index  ,                                                                    249
----------

            LIST OF PLATES.

Froniispiece^=^TirE SXMARiTAN PENtATEucH-notL at Nablous.

  I. Clay Tablet froji TelI el-Amarna .                    facinff pciffe 18
                                                                                 21
 n. Hebrew Synagogue-roll (Brit. Mus. Harl. 7619)                              24

-- III. TfiE MoABiTE Stone

IV.--Hebhtew MS. (Brit. Mns. Or. 4445)                     39

V. SamaritaSt PeNtatewch (Eome, Barberini Library

            106)                                           47

VI. CodeX MarchaIianus                                     64

VII. Peshitto Syriac MS. (Bri t. Mils. Add. 1442-5)        74

-- A'lII. Codex Sinaiticus                                 125

-- IX. CoDF.x Alexandeinus                                 130

X. Codex Vaticanus .                                       136

XL -- Codex Epiieaemi                                      139

-- XII. Codex Bezae .                                      142

XIII. Codex Claeomontanus                                  145

XIV.--Cursive Greek MS. (Evan. 348)                        149

XV. Cueetonian MS. of Old Syriac (Brit. Mus. Add

            14451)                                         155

XVI.--BoHAiRic MS. (Brit. Mus. Or. 1315) .                 161

XVIL--Sahidic MS. (Brit. Mus. Or. 4717 (10))               163

XVIII. Codex Vercellensis (Old Latin)                      167

XIX. Codex Amiatinus (Vulgate)                             171

XX. The Lindisfarne Gospels                                179

..... XXI. Alcuin's Vulgate (Brit. Mus. Add. 10546)        183
                                                           187
XXII. Mazaein Bible

XXIII. English Gospels of the 10th Century (Brit

            Mus. Eeg. 1 A XIV.)                            194

XXIV.--Wycliffe's Bible (Bodleian MS, 957)                 200

XXV, Tyndale's New Testament                               214
OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS

                                                     BEING A

        IFDistori? of tbe XTejt auD its XTranslatlons,

         CHAPTER I.

         VARIATIONS EST THE BIBLE TEXT.

T HE following history of the Bible text and of its translation into
       English is an attempt to trace the manner in which the words

         of the sacred books have been handed do^^^l to

in the Revised US, from the time when they were first written

         in the original Hebrew or Greek, down to their

appearance in our English Eevised Version to-day. No one can

read that version intelligently without seeing that in very many

places there is considerable doubt as to the exact words used by

the original writers. On nearly every page, especially of the New-

Testament, we see notes in the margin to the effect that " Some

ancient authorities read" this, or "Many ancient authorities read"

-- that, these readings being alternatives to the readings actually

adopted in the text of the Revisers. The question inevitably follows,

What are these " ancient authorities ? " How comes it that they

differ so frequently among themselves ? How do we, or how does

anyone, know which to follow among these divergent witnesses t

And then the larger question suggests itself, How has the text of

the Bible come down to us ? "We know that the several books

which compose it were written many centuries ago, and in other

languages than ours. What do we know of their history since

that time, and how have they been preserved to us and trans-

lated into our own language .''

S 2764.                                  A
2  OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

   The difficulties suggested by the various readings in the Revised
Version are made more prominent if we look at such an edition as

                        the Variorum Bible.* Here we find the several
    ^^^Bible°^^TM " ^^0^6^*' authorities " quoted separately whenever

                           there is any important conflict of evidence as to
the exact reading of any passage. Thus at Matt. 19. 17, to the

words "Why callest thou Me good ? " there is the following note :
" So C A, Pesh. Theh. Mel. r marg. ; "Why askest thou me con-
cerning the good ? ^^ B D L, ^Z. La. Ti. Tr. We. WH. r." The

meaning of this note is that there are two divergent readings
recorded in this passage. The manuscripts known as C and A
(which will be found described in Ch, VII.), two ancient trans-

lations of the New Testament into Syriac and Egyptian, the

editor M^Clellan, and tho marghi of the Revised Version, read

" Why callest thou Me good ? " On the other hand, the four

manuscripts y, B, D, L, the editors Alford, Lachmann, Tischen-
dorf, Tregelles, Weiss, Westcott and Hort, and the text of the

Revised Version, have "Why askest thou Me concerning the

good ? " To the student acquainted with these critical symbols,
this information is intelligible and important ; but unless wc
have some previous knowledge of the subject we shall not under-

stand the comparative value of the various authorities quoted.

The indispensable information is given in the preface and intro-
duction to the Variorum Bible ; but, although stated with ad-
mirable completeness and conciseness, it is necessarily brief,

   * This is, I believe, the only critical edition of the EiWe in English. It
gives a digest, under the head of " Various Eenderings," of the translations
or interpretations proposed by the best commentators in doubtful passages,
and under the head of " Various Eeadings," of the more important variations
of the principal manuscripts, versions, and editions. The names of the editors
(Prof. Driver and Prof. Cheyne of the O.T., Prof. Sanday and the Rev.
R. L. Clarke of the N.T., and the Rev. C. J. Ball of the Apocrypha) are guar-
antees for the excellence of the work. The surest results of Biblical criticism
are thus made accessible to English readers in a clear and compact form ; and
since the present book is intended primarily for those who study the Bible in
English, reference will generally be made to the notes of the Variorum Bible,
rather than to the critical editions of the Hebrew or Greek texts.
                                                                       ;

               VABIATI0N8 IN THE BIBLE TEXT.

and it may occur to many to wish to know more about the

authorities on which our knowledge of the Bible rests. It is all

very well to say that such-and-such manuscripts support one

reading of a passage, while other manuscripts support another,

but we are no better able than before to judge which reading

is to be preferred unless we know which manuscripts are most

likely to be right. The questions asked above recur with doubled

How force :  do there come to be diflferences in different records of

the Bible text, and how do we know which reading to prefer when

the authorities differ ?

   That these questions are not idle nor unimportant may be seen

by mentioning a few of the passages in which important variations

  E_,xampl,es  We are found.  will take, for the moment, the Gos-
of important                  '               '

               pels alone. The Doxology of the Lord's Prayer

               is omitted in the oldest copies of Matt. 6. 13

several copies omit Matt. 16. 2, 3 altogether ; a long additional
passage is sometimes found after Matt. 20. 28" ; the last twelve

verses of St. Mark are omitted altogether by the two oldest copies

of the original Greek ; one very ancient authority inserts an addi-
tional incident after Luke 6. 4, while it alters the account of the
institution of the Lord's Supper in Luke 22. 19, 20, and omits

altogether Peter's visit to the sepulchre in 24. 12, and several other

details of the Resurrection ; the version of the Lord's Prayer in

Luke 11. 2-4 is much abbreviated in many copies ; the incident
of the Bloody Sweat is omitted in 22. 43, 44, as also is the word

from the Cross, " Father, forgive them," in 23. 34 ; the mention

of the descent of an angel to cause the moving of the waters of

Bethesda is entirely absent from the oldest copies of John 5. 4, and

all the best authorities omit the incident of the woman taken in

adultery in 7. 53-8. 11. Besides the larger discrepancies, such as

these, there is scarcely a verse in which there is not some variation

of phrase in some copies. No one can say that these additions or

omissions or alterations are matters of mere indifference. It is

true (and it cannot be too emphatically stated) that none of the

fundamental truths of Christianity rests on passages of which the

'                                             A2
                                                                           ;

4                                 OTJR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

genuineness is doubtful ; but it still remains a matter of concern

to us to know that our Bible, as we have it to-day, represents as
closely as may be the actual words used by the writers of the sacred

books. It is the object of this volume to present, within a moderate

compass and as clearly as possible, the means we have for knowing

that it does so ; to trace the history of the sacred texts from the
time of their original composition to our own Revised Version of

1885                              to show the authorities on which they rest, and the com-
                               ;

parative value to be put upon each. It is the special duty of

scholars to weigh the evidence on each particular disputed passage,

and to form editions and translations of the sacred books ; but any
intelligent reader, without any knowledge of either Greek or

Hebrew, can learn enough to understand the processes of criticism

and the grounds on which the judgments of scholars must be

based. Nor is the subject dry or uninteresting. The history of the

Bible text has a living interest for all those who care for its con-

tents ; and no Englishman should be altogether ignorant of the

history of the English Bible.

   One preliminary question should be cleared away before pro-

ceeding to the history of the text. It is the question that naturally

   ,,,                            .  .  How rises first ;  do various readings of a passage

   of variations in come into existence ? It is a question easily

                                        answered, so soon as the character of ancient

books is understood. Nowadays, when an author writes a book,

he sends it to the printer, from whom he receives proof-sheets

and he corrects the proof-sheets until he is satisfied that it is

printed accurately, and then hundreds or thousands of copies, as

the case may be, are struck off from the same types and distributed

to the world. Each one of these copies is exactly like all the rest,

and tKere can be no varieties of readings. All the extant copies

of, say, any one edition of Macaulay's History or Tennyson's Poems

are identical. Tennyson may have himself altered his own verses

from time to time, and so have other authors ; but no one doubts
that in each edition of a modern book we have (slips of editor or

printer excepted) exactly what the author intended at the time, and
VARIATIONS IN THE BIBLE TEXT.

that each copy of it is exactly like every other copy. But before

the invention of printing this was far from being the case. Each

separate copy of a book had to be written by hand ; and the human
hand and brain have not yet been created which could copy the

whole of a long work absolutely without error. Often (and this

we may easily believe to have been especially the case in the early

days of the Christian Church, when it was a poor, half-educated,

and persecuted body) copies were made hurriedly and without

opportunity for minute revision. Mistakes were certain to creep

in ; and when once in existence they were certain to increase, as
fresh copies were made from manuscripts already faulty. If

the original manuscripts of the sacred book were still preserved,

the errors of later copies would be to us now a matter of indiffer-

ence ; but since the original manuscripts perished long ago, we

have to try to arrive at their contents by a comparison of later

copies, all of which are more or less faulty and all varying from

one another. This is the problem of textual criticism, and it will

be seen that its sphere is large. Printing was invented in 14:54,

little more than four centuries ago ; but for all the centuries before

that date, books existed only in hand-written copies, which we call

= manuscripts (from the Latin manu-scripfum ^^ v/riaen by hand,"

often abbreviated as " MS.''). Of the chief of these manuscripts

we shall have to speak at greater length in the course of this book.

Meanwhile it will be clear that the existence of difPerences of

reading in many passages of the Bible as we have it to-day is due

to the mistakes made in copying them by hand during the many

centuries that elapsed between the composition of the books and

the invention of printing.

The mistakes of scribes are of many kinds and of varying im-

portance. Sometimes the copyist confuses words of similaiT sound,

                   as in English we sometimes find our correspon-

      copyists :   dents write there for their or here for hear. Some-
                   times he passes over a word by accident; and
1. Errors of hand  this is especially likely to happen when two
      and eye.

adjoining words end with the same letters. Sometimes this cause
                                                    ;

   6  OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

   of error operates more widely. Two successive lines of the manu-

   script from which he is copying end with the same or similar
   words ; and the copyist's eye slips from the first to the second,
   and the intermediate line is omitted. Sometimes, again, the
   manuscript from which he is copying has been furnished with
   short explanatory notes in the margin, and he fails to see where
   the text ends and the note begins, and so copies the note into the

   text itself.                                     Errors of the

      These are all simple errors of hand and eye.

   mind ai-e more dangerous, because they are less easy to detect.

              The copyist's mind wanders a little from the

      ^'^in"  ^°^^ ^® ^^ copying, and he writes down Avords
              which come mechanically into his head, just as

   we do nowadays if people talk while we are writing, and distract

   our attention. Some words are familiar in certaui phrases, and

   the familiar phrase runs off the pen of the copyist when the word

   A should be written in some other combination.   form of this

   error is very common in manuscripts of the Gospels. The same

   event is often narrated in two or more of them, in slightly different

   language ; and the copyist, either consciously or unconsciously,

   alters the words of the one version to make them the same as

   A those of the other.  careful reader of the Variorum Bible

   or the Revised Version will note many instances where this has

   happened. Thus in Matt. 11. 19 the Authorised Version has

   " But wisdom is justified of her children," as in Luke 7. 35 ; but
   the Revised Version tells us that the original text had " works "

   instead of " children " here, the truth being that the copyists of all

   \ except the earliest extant manuscripts have altered it, so as to

   ! make it correspond with the account in St. Luke. Similarly in

     Matt. 16. 13, our Lord's question runs (in the r.v.) "Who do

    f

   I men say that the Son of Man is ? " and the margin tells us
     that " Many ancient authorities read that /, the Son of Man, am

   I

     see Mark 8. 27, Luke 9. 18." In Matt. 23. 14 a whole verse has

     probably been inserted from the parallel passages in Mark and

      Luke ; and so with Mark 15. 28. li\ Luke 6. 48 the concluding

/
    VARIATIONS IN THE BIBLE TEXT.

words of the parable of the house built on the rock, "because

it had been well builded," have been altered in "many ancient

authorities" in accordance with the more striking and familiar

phrase in St. Matthew, " for it had been founded upon the rock."

Errors like these increase in the later copies, as the words of the

sacred narrative are more and more familiar to the copyists ; and
when once made they do not admit of correction, unless we are

able to examine copies written before the corruption took place.

They do not betray themselves by injuring the sense of the pas-

sage, as is generally the case with errors of the first class.

  An untrue hand or eye or an over-true memory may do much

harm in a copyist ; but worst and most dangerous of all is it when

,,  .the copyist begins to think for himself. The

deliberate alter- veneration in which the sacred books were held

    has generally protected them against intentional

alterations of the text, but not entirely so. The harmonisation of

the Gospel narratives, described in the last paragraph, has cer-

tainly been in some cases intentional ; and that, no doubt, without

the smallest wish to deceive, but simply with the idea of supple-

menting the one narrative from its equally authentic companion.

Sometimes the alterations are more extensive. The earliest Greek

translation of the Old Testament contains several passages in the

books of Esther and Daniel which are not found in the Hebrew.

-- The long passages, Mark 16. 9-20 and John 7. 53 8. 11, which

are absent from the oldest manuscripts of the New Testament,

must have been either omitted in these or inserted in the others

intentionally. If, as is more probably the case, they have been

inserted in the later copies, this was no doubt done in order to

supplement the Gospel from some other good source, and the

narratives are almost certainly authentic, though they may not

have been written by the Evangelist in whose Gospel they now

appear. Indeed an Armenian translation of St. Mark has quite

recently been discovered, in which the last twelve verses of

St. Mark are ascribed to Aristion, who is otherwise known as

one of the earliest of the Christian Fathers ; and it is quite
8  OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

possible that this tradition is correct, and that Aristion compiled

this short summary to take the place of the original ending, which

had been lost. There is, however, no reason at all to suppose that

additions of this kind have been made in any except a very few

cases. The evidence for our Bible text is too great and of too

varied a description to allow us to suppose that passages have been

interpolated without any sign of it being visible. The intentional

alterations of scribes are, for the most part, verbal, not substantial,

such as the modification of a phrase in one Evangelist to suit the

narrative of another, or the combination of two reports of some

utterance into one ; and errors of this kind can generally be de-

tected on a comparison of several different manuscripts, in some

of which the alteration will not have been made.

   From this short account of the different classes of mistakes into

which the copyists of manuscripts were most liable to fall, it will

                      be clear that the later a manuscript is in date, the

   scripts the^mo'st  more likely it is to contain many errors. Each
   likely to be free
                      ^^jjjg ^ fresh copy is made, some new mistakes will
       from error.                     ^''        '

                      probably be introduced, while only the most ob-

vious blunders in the manuscript copied will be corrected. It may

therefore be stated as a general rule that the earlier a manuscript

is, the better is its text likely to be. The rule is only a general

one, and is liable to exceptions ; for instance, a manuscript written

in the year 1200, if copied direct from a manuscript of the year

350, will probably be more correct than a manuscript written in

the year 1000, which was copied from one written in 850 or 900.

Each manuscript must therefore be searched, to see if it shows

signs of containing an early form of the text ; but the general

rule that the earliest manuscripts are the best will still usually

hold good.

   The problem which lies before the textual critic, as the student

of the language of the Bible is technically called, is now becoming

   Tm-hL.e met^h^odA of1, clear.  The  ori&ginal  manuscriprts  of  the  Bible,
                                                                                             >

   recovering the written by the authors of the various books, have

                      long ago disappeared. The critic's object, conse-
                                                             ;

VARIATIONS IN THE BIBLE TEXT.

quently, is to reconstruct the text of these original manuscripts by

a comparison of the later copies which have come down to us

and the difficulty of his task depends on the age and number of

A these copies which he is able to compare.           diagram will make

the position clear.

                                             A

                                                f 0.

             h  i i h n I rn. n

. /A               Al IIA
    jo g        Iuv I
                rsi
                                                }v jc y 5

A Here represents the original author's copy of a book ; i and c

are copies made from it ; d, e, /, g are copies made from h and c,
and so on. Some errors are sure to be made in i and c, but not
the same in each ; d will correct a few of those in h, but will copy
the rest and add more ; e will both correct and copy different ones,
and so will /and g and all the subsequent copies. So, as time goes
on, the number of errors will go on increasing, and the extreme
copies diverge from one another more and more. Often a copyist
will use two manuscripts to copy from (for instance, we may sup-

pose the writer of p to have copied from n as well as from h), and

then the errors of two different lines of descent will become mixed.
At some, stage in the history of the text perhaps some scholar will
compare several copies, correct what he thinks are mistakes in
them, and cause copies to be made of his corrected text ; and then
all manuscripts which are taken, directly or indirectly, from these
corrected copies will bear the stamp of this revision, and will differ

from those of which the line of descent is different. Now suppose

all the manuscripts denoted by the letters in the diagram to have
disappeared (and it must be remembered that by far the greater
number of copies of any ancient book have perished long ago),
10  OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

except p, I, and y. It is evident that none of these copies will con-

A tain exactly the true text of ; each will have diverged from it,

but each will have diverged differently. Some mistakes they may
have in common, but in most they will differ ; and wherever they
differ it is the business of textual criticism to determine which
manuscript has the true reading, and so to try to re-establish by

comparison the original text of A.
   Such, but infinitely complicated by the number of manuscripts

of the Bible which have come down to us, and by the long lapse of

years since the originals were written, is the task of the scholars

who try to restore to us the exact words of the sacred books. The
object of the chapters which follow is to show in more detail the

nature of the problem in respect to the Old Testament and New

Testament respectively ; to state what is known, or plausibly con-
jectured, concerning the history of their text ; and to describe the
principal manuscripts of each, and the other means available for
the detection of mistakes and the restoration of the truth. The

story is not so technical but that all may understand it, and all can

appreciate the interest and value of the minutest study of the true

Word of God.
' One word of warning, already referred to, must be emphasised in
conclusion. No fundamental doctrine of the Christian faith rests

   _T,ext^ual, errors on a dis^puted reading°. Constant references to
  do not endanger mistakes and divergencies of reading, such as the

                          plan of this book necessitates, might give rise to
the doubt whether the substance, as well as the language, of the
Bible is not open to question. It cannot be too strongly asserted
that in substance the text of the Bible is certain. Especially is this

\the case with the New Testament.* The number of manuscripts

    * Dr. Hort, whose authority on the point is quite incontestable, estimates the

proportion of words about which there is some doubt at about one-eighth of the

whole ; but by far the greater part of these consists merely of diiferences in

order and other unimportant variations, and " the amount of what can in any

.... sense be called substantial variation  can hardly form more than a

      thousandth part of the entire text."  (Introduction to The New Testavient in

^ the original Greek, p. 2).
VAEIATIONS ly THE BIBLE TEXT.  11

of the New Testament, of early translations from it, and of quota-

tions from it in the oldest writers of the Church is so large, that it
is practically certain that the true reading of every doubtful pas-
sage is preserved in some one or other of these ancient authorities.
This can be said of no other ancient book in the world. Scholars
are satisfied that they possess substantially the true text of the

principal Greek and Roman writers whose works have come down

to us, of Sophocles, of Thucydides, of Cicero, of Virgil, yet our
knowledge of their ^vritings depends on a mere handful of manu-

scripts, whereas the manuscripts of the New Testament are counted

by hundreds, and even thousands. In the case of the Old Testa-
ment we are not quite in such a good position, as will be shown
presently. In some passages it seems certain that the true reading
has not been preserved by any ancient authority, and we are driven
to conjecture in order to supply it. But such passages are an

infinitesimal portion of the whole and may be disregarded. The
Christian can take the whole Bible in his hand and say without
fear or hesitation that he holds in it the true Word of God, faith-
fully handed down from generation to generation throughout the

centuries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;

                                                                                ( 12 )

                                                                                CHAPTER II.

    THE AUTHOKITIES FOR THE BIBLE TEXT.

TTT'E have seen that the Bible has been preserved to us, for

''  many centuries previous to the invention of printing, by

means of copies written by hand ; and we have seen that in such

copies mistakes are certain to arise and multiply. N'ow if a

scholar at this present day were to take in hand the task of

correcting these mistakes and recovering the true text, how would

he set about it ? Of course, as a matter of fact, he would find

that very much of the work had already been done for him by

earlier scholars                                                                but we will suppose that nothing has been done,
                                                                             ;

and see how he must go to work. That will show us the way

in which scholars for the last four centuries have laboured on the

test of the Bible.

In the first place he will examine as many as possible of the

manuscripts of the Bible in the original languages in which it was

                                                                                written, Hebrew and Greek. These are scattered

                                                                                about in all the great libraries of the world, and

must be visited and carefully studied. He wiU note which are

the oldest, he will use his judgment to determine which are the

best. Where aU the manuscripts are agreed, he has nothing more

to do, and those parts of the text are put down at once as certain.

Where there are differences between the manuscripts, he will have

to decide which of the various readings is the more probable. In

some cases the reading of a manuscript will be obviously wrong

in many it will be easy to see that the one reading is a perversion

-- of the other, that the copyist has inadvertently dropped out a

word or misread the word in the original from which he was

copying, or has fallen into some other of the classes of error
THE AUTHORITIES FOR THE BIBLE TEXT.  13

described in the preceding chapter. In this way a correct repre-

sentation of the greater part of the text will be obtained. Still

there will remain a considerable number of passages about which
the manuscripts differ, but in which it is not possible to decide at
once what reading is right. Then it will be necessary to discrimi-
nate between the manuscripts. Our scholar's earlier investigations
will have shown him which manuscripts are generally trustworthy,
and which are most full of mistakes. As a general rule he will
prefer the reading which is supported by the oldest manuscripts,
as being nearest to the time of the original work ; and if all the
oldest manuscripts are on one side, and all the later on the other,
the reading of the former will certainly be adopted. Where the
older manuscripts are divided, his task becomes harder ; he has to
consider whether either of the alternative readings is likely to have
been derived from the other, or if one of them is more likely than
the other to have been invented at a later time. For instance,
there is a tendency among scribes, when they do not understand a
phi'ase, to substitute one more easy of comprehension ; and hence

it is a rule of criticism that a harder reading is generally to be
preferred to an easier one, since the latter is more likely to have
been substituted for the former than vice versa. This rule must
be applied with discretion, however, for the unintentional altera-
tions of scribes will often produce a harder reading than the true
one. Another principle is to try to classify the manuscripts in
groups, those which habitually agree with one another being pro-

bably descended from some common ancestor ; and a reading
which is supported by two or more groups is more likely to be

right than one which is supported by one only, even though that

one may be a very large and numerous group. By the time our

scholar has proceeded so far in his work, he will have formed a
pretty confident opinion as to which manuscripts are the most
worthy of trust ; and then, when other methods fail to determine
the true reading in a doubtful passage, he will be inclined to accept
that reading which is supported by the manuscripts which he
believes to be the best.
]4 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

So far our scholar has confined himself entirely to the manu-

scripts of the sacred books in their original languages ; but he will

                     be making a great mistake if he stops there. He

                         will remember that the Bible has been translated
into many different languages, and he will bethink himself that a

translation which has been made with any care and accuracy will

generally show what was the Hebrew or G-reek text which the

translator had before him. Now several of the translations of the

-- Bible, such as the Samaritan and Greek versions of the Old
-- Testament, the Syiiac and Latin versions of the New were cer-

tainly made at a date much earlier than that at which any of the

manuscripts which we now possess of the original Hebrew and

Greek were written. The oldest manuscript of the Greek New

Testament now in existence was written about a.d. 350 ; but the

earliest Syriac and Latin translations of the New Testament were

made somewhere about a.d. 150. Hence, if we can gather from

the existing copies of these translations what were the Greek words

which their authors were translating, we know what was read in

that particular passage in a Greek manuscript current about the

year 150, when these translations were made ; and this brings us

back very near to the time when the originals of the New Testa-

ment books were themselves written. It is true that we have not

the original copies of the Latin and Syriac versions, any more than

we have the originals of the Greek itself, and that a similar process

of comparison of copies to that described in the last paragraph

must be gone through if we are to discover the original readings

of the translations ; but in many cases this can be done with

certainty, and then we have a very early testimony indeed to the

We original Greek text.  talk sometimes of the " stream of tra-

dition " by which the text of the Bible has been borne down to us

from the fountain-head in the original manuscripts ; well, the

service of the Versions (as the translations of the Bible into other

languages are technically called) is that they tap the stream near

the fountain-head. They are unaffected by any corruptions that
may have crept into the Greek text after the translations were
                                THE AUTHORITIES FOR THE BIBLE TEXT.                     15

made                            they may have corruptions of  their own, but they will  not
                             ;

generally be the same as the corruptions in the Greek text, and

they will serve mutually to correct one another. To alter the

comparison, we get several groups of evidence converging on the

same spot, as the accompanying diagram shows.

                                    A fOriffirudlext)

                                ^<  Varirn/s Mar/ascrt.pts

Oar scholar has yet one other source to which he may turn for

evidence as to the original text, namely, the quotations of isolated

^F^herT^^                           passages in the writings of the early Fathers.

                                    Many of the first Christian writers whose works

                                    -- have been preserved for instance, Ireneeus,

Origen, Jerome, Athanasius-- must have used manuscripts of the

Bible older than any that we now have, and many of them quoted

largely from the Bible in their writings. If, therefore, we know in

w'hat form they quoted any particular passage, we may argue that

they found that form of it in the manuscript which they used. But

this argument must be used with much caution. In the first place,

it is evident that they often quoted from memory. Copies of the

Bible were not so common in those days as they are now, and, in

the absence of the modern division into chapters and verses, it was

less easy to turn up a passage when required to verify a quotation.

A curious proof of the liability to error in quotations from memory

is furnished by a modern divine. It is said that Jeremy Taylor

quotes the well-known text, " Except a man be born again he
16 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

cannot see the kingdom of G-od," no less than nine times, yet
only twice in the same form, and in no single instance correctly.
"We must not assume that the ancient Fathers were infallible

in their memories. Further, it is often difficult to be certain

that we have the quotations as the Fathers themselves wrote
them. If a scribe who was copying a manuscript of one of the
early Fathers found a text quoted in a form unfamiliar to him, he
would be not unlikely to alter it into the form then current. For
these reasons it is dangerous to base an argument for a reading on
the Fathers alone, except when the context in which it is found
shows conclusively in what form the writer quoted it ; but to con-
firm other evidence they may often be of very great value. They
will be of still more value when their own texts have themselves
been critically edited, which is at present far from being the case

with all of them.

 -- Manuscripts, Versions, Fathers, such are the resources of our

scholar in his task of recovering the true text of the Bible. Of
the third of these we cannot speak more at length within the
compass of this book ; but in the history of the two first is the
history of the Bible text. Our object will be to describe, first
the principal manuscripts, and then the chief translations, of each-
Testament in turn, and so to carry down the history of the Bible

-- from the earliest times to our own days, to show how our own

English Bible is the lineal descendant of the volumes once written
by Prophet, Apostle, and Evangelist.
                                                                                                                                                                                              ;

                         ( 17 )

                         CHAPTER III.

THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BIBLE.

"TN the year 1887 a discovery was made which has revolutionised

-- our knowledge of the conditions of writing in Palestine in

        ^^^     the earliest times. In the course of that year an
Tell el-Amarna
                Egvptian woman found, amid the ruins of an
      Tablets.
                ancient city about half-way between Thebes and

Memphis, now known as Tell el-Amarna, a collection of clay tablets
inscribed with strange symbols. When these were brought to the

knowledge  of  Oriental  scholars, their excitement was immense                                                                                                                                                                     for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ;

here, in the middle of Egypt, were documents written, not, after

the manner of the country, in the Egyptian language and upon

papyrus, but engraved upon clay, and in the unmistakable cunei-

form, or wedge-shaped, writing characteristic of Assyria and

Babylonia. Nor did their surprise lessen as they deciphered the

writing and discovered its meaning. For these tablets proved to

be the official correspondence of Egyptian governors or vassal-

princes, stationed in Palestine and in other places beyond the

borders of Egypt, with their master. King Amenophis IV. of

Egypt, and his ministers at home. Their date is about the year

1380 B.C., and, according to some scholars, the time is that at

which Joshua and the Hebrews were overrunning southern Pales-

tine, while the Hittites were conquering Damascus, and the

Ammonites were invading Phoenicia. Jerusalem and Lachish,

Jabin, king of Hazor, and Japhia, king of Gezer, are mentioned

by name. It is a record contemporary with the events described

in the Book of Joshua, and in part relating to those events

themselves.*

* If this chronology be accepted, the ordinary date assigned to the Exodus,

in the reign of Merenptah, successor of Rameses II., will have to be abandoned
for Amenophis IV. ruled about a century before Rameses II. The question

8 2764.                                 B
                                                                 ;

18 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

The direct historical importance of the discovery is very great

but it is hardly less important for the light it throws on the literary

               conditions of the East at the time when they were

of -OTiting/ wiitten. It proves that writing was familiarly
                    know^n and freely used in Palestine fourteen cen-

turies before Christ. It shows that the Babylonian language was
the recognised medium of official intercourse in the East at that

date, much as French has been in modern Europe. It shows that
historical records were preserved, from which later writers may

have drawn their materials. It tells us something of the form in

' which were written, if not the Bible books themselves, at least

some of the documents from which they were composed.

   It is no part of the plan of this book to discuss the date at
which the several books of the Old Testament were written. That

is a subject requiring a treatise to itself. All that concerns us at

present is to know in what outward form and shape books were

written in Palestine during the periods in which the Old Testa-

ment books may have been composed. Palestine lay between the

kingdoms of Egypt and Babylonia, and its literary development

was affected from both sides. Both in Egypt and in Babylonia

writing was largely practised from the earliest times of which we

have knowledge, but in different materials and in very different

languages. The writers of Palestine, as will be shown, borrowed

something from each, but they also struck out new developments

of their own.

In Babylonia the material on which books were written was

clay. The clay was moulded into tablets or cylinders of various

               shapes, and the writing waS inscribed on them

^abyknia^      with a sharp-pointed instrument while the clay

               was still moist. Whole libraries of these tablets,

of all kinds of sizes, have been discovered, and there may now be

whether the Abiri, mentioned in the tablets as overrunning southern Palestine,
are the same as the Hebrews, must be left for specialists to decide ; and their
opinions are at present divided. According to the usual chronology, the Tell el-

Amarna tablets belong to the century before the Exodus,
THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BIBLE. 19

seen in the British Museum the tablets on which are recorded the

ancient Babylonian story of the Flood, so curiously resembling the

narrative in Genesis, and Sennacherib's account of his campaigns

against Hezekiah of Judah. The discovery of the Tell el-Amarna

tablets (one of which is reproduced in Plate I. as an example of this

form of book) proves that writing of this kind was freely practised

in Palestine at the time of the invasion of Joshua, or even earlier.

We do not indeed know that the Hebrews themselves ever adopted

this form of writing on clay for their books ; but there can be

very little doubt that Hebrew writers made use of records of this

kind, which they found stored up in the cities of Palestine.* Even

if we accept the very latest date which the most advanced

criticism has assigned to the composition of the Pentateuch in its

present form, the compilers of it must have used records of a far

earlier date, and among them, as we now see, may have been clay

tablets contemporaneous with the events narrated in the history.

In Egypt, on the other hand, books were made of papyrus, a

material resembling paper in general characteristics, but manufac-

                tured out of the fibres of the papyrus-plant, which

            ^"  then grew plentifully in the waters of the Nile.
                The fibres of the stalk of this plant were separated,
Egypt

and laid upon one another in two layers, so that the fibres in the

upper layer ran horizontally, and those of the lower layer perpen-

dicularly. The two layers were then moistened with Nile water

and fastened together by glue and pressure into a single sheet.

These sheets were then attached to one another, side by side, so as

to form long rolls of papyrus ; the surface of the roll was rubbed

and polished until it was smooth enough to be written on wuth

ease, and on these rolls the writing was inscribed with reed pens

and vegetable ink. One of these rolls, still preserved, reaches the

enormous length of 144 feet, but usually they are much shorter,

twenty feet being a fair average length for a Greek papyrus

   * The name of Kiriath-sepher, mentioned in Josh, 15. 15, means "the city
of books," and is so translated in the Greek version of the passage. The name
evidently implies that books were stored there.

                                                                                  B2
20 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

ma,nuscript. Brittle as the papyrus becomes with age, the dry
climate of Egypt has preserved hundreds and thousands of such

manuscripts, the earliest now extant having been written about the

year 2500 B.C. These were the books with which the Israelites
became familiar during their residence in Egypt, and it was from
these that the form of their own books in later times was derived.
The roll form, and to a great extent the papyrus material, were
also adopted from Egypt by the Greeks ; and all the great works
of classical literature were written in this manner. It was not until
after the beginning of the Christian era that the page form, as in
a modern book, came into existence. The sands of Egypt still
from time to time give us back books written fifteen, twenty, or
even thirty centuries ago ; but only the later ones are in book
form, the earlier are invariably rolls.

   There is nothing in the historical books of the Bible which ex-

pressly tells us the shape and form of books in the earlier part of

            that period, but in the times of the prophets

PalestEie?  ^*^^^^ viQVQ certainly used. Tablets were no doubt
            employed for short inscriptions, such as Jeremiah

was thinking of when he said " The sin of Judah is written with a

pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond ; it is graven upon

the table of their heart" (Jer. 17. 1), and it was upon a "great
tablet" (Isa. 8. 1, R.V.) that Isaiah wrote the words " For Maher-
shalal-hash-baz " ; but it was a " roll of a book " which Jeremiah

took in order that Baruch might write therein with ink the words

which the Lord had spoken against Israel, and which Jehoiakim

cut with a penknife and burnt in the fire that was in the brasier
before him (Jer. 36. 2, 18, 23).* It was a " roll of a book " which

was spread before Ezekiel, written within and without with lamen-

tations and mourning and woe (Ezek. 2. 9, 10). The material of

    * There can be little doubt that the alternative rendering, " columns," instead
of "leaves," given in the E.V. and the Variorum Bible, is right. The knife
which the king used was, as the note in the Variorum Bible explains, a scribe's
knife, used for erasing words wrongly written ; and this makes it probable that
the material of the roll was skin, not papyrus, on which a knife could hardly
be used, on account of its thinness of texture.
PLATE I J.

                   -- Keukew Synagogue-Roll 14tii Cent.

                                               (Original height, excluding rollers, 27 in.)
                                     THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BIBLE. 21

which these rolls were made was not pa])yrus, however, but the

prepared skins of sheep and goats. Skins were used in the ancient

world as a material for books wherever papyrus was not obtain-

able                                 when specially prepared for this purpose they form the
                            ;

material known as parchment or vellum. It is possible, indeed

probable, that papyrus was imported into Palestine, as it was into

Greece, and was used concurrently with skins ; but the sacred

books seem always to have been written on the more durable

material.

If, then, we ask the question. Of what form were the original

manuscripts of the Bible ? the answer will be that the documents

Form                             ,,     ,           .  from which the historical books of the Old Testa-
                                                       ment were composed were very possibly in some
                               of    the   ori-        ^^^^g inscribed on clay tablets, but that the books

ginal manuscripts

of the Bihle.

themselves were ^ATitten on rolls, possibly of papyrns, but pro-

bably of skins, more or less carefully prepared. The later copies

were certainly on skins. "Whether on papyrus or on skins, the

writing was arranged in columns of moderate width, which take

the place of pages in a modern book. The skin or papyrus was

either wound up in a single roll, the end being inside, or else

wound round two sticks, one at each end, in which case it

was unrolled from the one and rolled up round the other as the

reader progressed. The latter form was stereotyped, at some date

early in the Christian period, as essential for copies of the Law

which were to be used in the service of the synagogue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  but copies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ;

for private reading were written in book form when that shape

came into general use. Specimens of both kinds are still in

existence, and can be seen in many museums and public libraries.

Plate II., which is taken from a Hebrew Pentateuch roll in the

British Museum, written on goat-skin in the fourteenth century,

will serve to show the general appearance of this kind of book.

   With regard to the original manuscripts of the books of the

New Testament, it is highly probable that many of them were

written on papyrus. Papyrus was still the common material of

the Greek literary world, and for books written by poor authors,
'2i OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

or for epistolary correspondence, it would almost certainly be used
rather than vellum. In Egypt, where some of the earliest copies

of the New Testament were made, papyrus would have been the

material employed, even for the most important and handsome
books. It has been remarked that the oldest vellum manuscripts
which we now possess, being written with many narrow columns
on a page, resemble in general appearance an open roll of papyrus
(see Plates VIII. and X., and the accompanying descriptions of
them) ; and from such a manuscript they may very likely have
been copied. "When, however, the Christian Scriptures came to be
regarded as on the same level of importance as the Old Testa-
ment Scriptures (which was not at first the case), copies intended
for church or library use would be written on vellum ; but for
private copies papyrus continued to be employed until the ex-
tinction of Greek writing in Egypt by the Arab conquest in the
seventh century. For copies of the translation into the native
Coptic tongue it continued to be used much later.

   The visitor to the British Museum may still see manuscripts

which reproduce in external form the books of the Bible as they
were first written. In one of the exhibition-cases he will see the
great synagogue rolls of the Hebrew Scriptures, written on large
and heavy skins, and wound round great wooden rollers, a weight

too heavy to lift with comfort in the hand. Elsewhere he may see
the copies for common use, written on ordinary vellum in the
familiar book form. Among the earliest Greek manuscripts he
will find delicate papyrus rolls, now spread out under glass for their
protection, with their narrow columns of small writing, which may
well represent that in which the Gospels and Epistles were first
written down ; and finally he will see one of the earliest extant
copies of the Greek Bible written in handsome letters upon fine
vellum, the monument of a time when the Church was becoming
prosperous under a Christian Empire, and now one of the most

valuable witnesses to the original text of the Bible that has been
spared to us by the ravages of time.
             \ 28 )

                 CHAPTER IV.
             THE HEBREW TEXT.

THE original manuscripts of the Hebrew books perished long

       ago, and the scholar who would find out, as near as may be,

the exact words which they contained, must, as we have seen,

begin by examining and comparing the copies, more or less dis-
tantly derived from these originals, which have come down to us.

What will he see then, when he opens one of the old Hebrew
volumes in one of our great libraries, and what will it tell him

concerning the text which it contains ?

In the first place he will see the page covered with characters

which to most people are quite unfamiliar. It is writing such as

that represented in Plate IV. The letters are generally of a

square shape, and underneath them are little dots and strokes.

The writing is usually arranged in columns, two or more going

to the page if the manuscript is in book form ; and the margins
are filled with other writing of similar appearance. What, now,

is the meaning of this? What is the history of the Hebrew

wi'itmg .''

The characters in which modern Hebrew manuscripts are

written are not the same as those which were in use when the i,^

The Hebrew   books of the Hebrew Scriptures were composed.
             jj^ ^^^ ^^^^^ ^f ^j^g Jewish kingdom, Hebrew was

             written in characters which were common to the

Hebrews themselves, the Samaritans, and the Phoenicians ; and

these characters, having been preserved by the Samaritans when

the Jews abandoned them, are known to us in the manuscripts of *

the Samaritan Pentateuch {see Plate V.). The oldest form in

which they are now extant is on the Moabite Stone, the famous

monument"oiT which Mesha, king of Moab, recorded his war with
24 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

Ahab of Judah about the year 890 B.C.* Plate III. contains a

representation of this most valuable relic of antiquity as it stands

to-day in the Louvre Museum at Paris. Two centuries later they

appear in the Siloam Inscription (about B.C. 700), carved on the

conduit leading to the Pool of Siloam in Jerusalem. After this

date they appear on coins and later inscriptions, and, as just stated,

in MSS. of the Samaritan Pentateuch. The Jewish story of the
origin of the " square " writing, as the later Hebrew characters are

called, is that Ezra brought it back with him from Babylon, and

that it was forthwith adopted for general use. This is only an

instance of the common habit of tradition, to assign to a single

man and a single moment a change which must have been spread

over several generations. The contemporary coins and inscriptions

enable us to trace the process, though imperfectly. In the first

place, the old stiff Hebrew characters were gradually modified,

after the Exile, so as to make them more cursive, more easily

written, that is, in running hand ; a change partly due to the

example of the contemporary Aramaic writing in Syria and

Arabia. Then, by way of reaction from this, and with the

intention, no doubt, of making the writing of the sacred books

more beautiful, the square characters were developed, and were

thenceforth adopted as the essential form for the manuscripts of

A the Scriptures.  similar phenomenon is seen in the case of the

Greek Bible, where we find the handsomest uncial writing (i.e. in

detached capital letters) springing up, in the fourth century, for

use in great copies of the Bible in the midst of a very debased and

unornamental style of cursive characters, of which many examples
have come down to us on papyrus. In the case of the Hebrew

writing, the change must have taken place before the time of our

= Lord, for the proverbial use of "jot" ( yod, the tenth letter in

   * The Moabite stone was found by a German Missionary, Herr Klein, in
1868, in the possession of some Arabs. It was then perfect, but before it was
acquired by M. Clermont-Ganneau for the Louvre Museum, the Arabs had
broken it in pieces, and many of the fragments have never been recovered. It
can, however, be restored by the help of a paper impression taken before it was

broken.
111.

              -- The Moabite Stone C'iiv. b.c. 890.

                                          (Original height, about i feet.)
             THE HEBREW TEXT.  25

the Hebrew alphabet) to indicate a very small object (as in

Matt. 5. 18) would only be possible after the adoption of the square
characters, since in the earlier alphabet yod was by no means the

smallest letter.

   The language in which the manuscripts we are examining are

written is, of course, Hebrew, a branch of the great Semitic family
                          of languages, which includes the Babylonian, As-

'^lan^^aee^  Syrian, Chaldsean, Phoenician, and other tongues
             spoken in "Western Asia. It was the spoken lan-

guage of Palestine down to the time of the Exile ; and even after

that date, when Aramaic was adopted for ordinary use, Hebrew

remained the literary language of the educated Jews. It is written
from right to left, not from left to right as in our modern
European books. But the special peculiarity of it is that in its

original state onlp the consonants were written, the vowels being

left to be filled up by the reader's mind. In the Hebrew manu-
script which we have supposed ourselves to be examining, the great
letters which form the lines of the writing are all consonants. The

vowels are indicated by the dots or points beneath these letters,
and these vowel-points are only a comparatively late invention, as
will be shown presently. This ancient practice of omitting the

vowels is one fertile cause of varieties in the text, for it will readily
be understood that doubts might often occur as to the proper

vowels to be supplied to a group of consonants. To take a

parallel from English, the consonants m r might be read either as

m(a)r(e) or m(i)r(e) or m(o)r(e), and it is quite possible that in
some cases the sense of the passage would not show for certain

which way was i-ight. A glance at the notes of the Variorum

Bible will show that this danger is far from being imaginary; e.g.,

in Deut. 28. 22, either " sword " or '· drought " may be read,

according to the vowels supplied ; in Judg. 15. 16, "heaps upon
heaps " or " I have flayed them " ; in Isa. 27. 7, " them that are
slain by him " or " those that slew him " ; and see Gen. 49. 5 and
Judg. 7. 1 3 for more extensive variations due to the same cause.

Besides the vowel points, accents are also added, to indicate
26 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

the rhythmical pronunciation of each word ; but these too are a

comparatively late invention.

   The main division of the Hebrew Old Testament is a classi-

fication of the books into three groups, known as the Law, the

Arrangement of                                  Prophets, and the Hagiographa, or sacred writ-
the Books of the
Old Testament.                                  ings. The Law included the five books of Moses,

                                                wh, i. c,h  we  now         ,,      i  t^        ,  rx.,  ^^     ,
                                                                                                    The Prophets
                                                                     call       the    Pentateuch.

comprised the historical books of Joshua, Judges, 1 and 2 Samuel,
1 and 2 Kings, which were known as "the Former Prophets " ; and
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the twelve Minor Prophets, known

as "the Later Prophets." The Hagiographa consisted of the

Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations,

Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, 1 and 2 Chronicles.
The origin of this classification and of the inclusion of several

historical and prophetic books among the Hagiographa, is un-

known                                  but  it  almost      certainly           implies    that  those    books  were
                                    ;

written later, and were among the last to be recognised as inspired.

Divisions of the books themselves into reading-lessons, paragraphs,

and vei"ses (very nearly corresponding to our modern verses) were
made in very early times ; but they are not of much importance
to us here. They are indicated in the manuscripts by blank spaces

of greater or lesser size.

So much for the external characteristics of the Hebrew manu-

scripts. What, now, is the history of the text of the books which

these manuscripts enshrine ?

The beginning of this history is necessarily obscure, because we

do not know the dates at which the various books of the Old

                                                Testament were originally written. One school

Hebrew Canon.^ ^^ critics tells US that the Pentateuch was written
                     by Moses, substantially in the form in which we

now have it, before the year 1400 B.C. The newer school is posi-

tive that, although the substance of the books is old, yet they were

not finally put into their present shape until after the Exile, about

B.C. 400, and that even the principal documents out of which

they are composed were not written before B.C. 700. With these
            TBE HEBREW TEXT.  27

controversies respecting the dates of the various books we have

nothing here to do. Even if we take the latest date, it is still far
earlier than the earliest period at which we have any evidence as
to the state of the text. The most we can do is to show, with
some approach to definiteness, at what periods the various books
were recognised as being inspired Scripture ; and it is from that
point that the care for their text may be supposed to have

commenced.

It seems tolerably certain that the three divisions of the books

of the Old Testament, mentioned just above, represent three stages

                       in the process known as the formation of the

L*Th?Law.   Hebrew Canon of Scripture; that is, of the
            authorised list of books recognised as sacred and

inspired. Whenever the books of the Pentateuch were written, it

is at least certain that they, constituting the Law, were the first

group of writings to be thus accepted. In the days of the kings

it was possible for the " book of the Law " (perhaps meaning our

Deuteronomy) to be lost and forgotten, and to be recovered as it

were by accident (2 Kings 22. 8) ; but the Captivity taught the

Jews to be careful of their Scriptures, and the Canon of the Law

may be taken as fixed about the time of the return from exile,

possibly under the guidance of Ezra, to whom Jewish tradition

assigned a special prominence in the work of collecting the sacred

books.* From this time forth the five books of Moses were

regarded as a thing apart. They were sacred ; and by degrees the
greatest care came to be devoted to copying them with perfect

accuracy and studying minutely every word that they contained.

There is reason to suppose that this extreme accuracy was not at

first required or obtained ; but in the time of our Lord it is clear

that the text of the Law was held in the utmost veneration, and the

   * The Jews themselves attributed the formation of the whole Canon to
Ezra, with the help of elders composing a body known as " The Great Syna-
gogue " ; but it has been shown that this body is an imaginary one, and it is
now generally recognised that the formation of the Canon must have been

gradual, following the stages here indicated.
28 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIEXT MANUSCRIPTS.

class of the " scribes," whose special duty was to copy the sacred

books, was fully established and held in considerable esteem.

The second group of books to obtain recognition as inspired,

and to be adopted into the Canon, was that of the Prophets,

                  This must have taken place between the date of

^*                Malachi, the last of the Prophets, about 430 B.C.,
      phlts^"^"'  and the reference to " the twelve prophets " in

Ecclesiasticus 49. 10, written about 180 B.C. ; but the date cannot

be fixed precisely. The remaining group, known as the Hagio-

grapha, is of a miscellaneous character, and for some time the

                  books composing it evidently circulated on much

        grapha.^^"' ^^^ same footing as other books which were
                          eventually excluded from the Canon, such as

Judith, Tobit, and Ecclesiasticus. When the final decision was

reached, we cannot tell. On the one hand, the books which now

form our Old Testament appear already to be distinguished from

those which we class as Apocrypha before the time of our Lord ;*

on the other, a certain amount of discussion as to the inspiration

of some of the books (such as the Song of Solomon) continued at

least until the end of the first century after Christ.

It is no part of our purpose here to discuss the question of the

formation of the Hebrew Canon in all its details. The point of

importance for us is that, taking the latest dates assigned by good

authorities, the Law was fully recognised as inspired Scripture by

about B.C. 450, the Prophets (including the earlier historical books)

about B.C. 300, and the Hagiographa about B.C. 100. From these

dates, then, at the latest, the special care for the preservation of

the text of these books must be supposed to begin. It would

seem, however, that this care was not at first so minute and pains-

taking as it afterwards became. During the early years of the

* It is noticeable that while there are many quotations in the New Testament

from each group of books in the Old, there is not a single direct quotation from

A the Apocrypha.  similar distinction js found in Josephus and Philo. It

was probably only in Alexandria that the apocryphal books had equal

currency with the canonical.
                     THE HEBBEW TEXT.  29

return from the Captivity, and throughout the wars of the Macca-

bees, there may well have been little time to spare for the labours
of scholarship, and the zeal of the Jews for their Scriptures may

well have related rather to their general contents than to the exact

details of their language. During the same period, too, it may be

remembered, came the change from the old to the square Hebrew

writing, which would naturally lead to errors in copying. With

the return of peace, however, came greater attention to study, and

in the famous schools of Hillel and Shammai, about the beginning

of the Christian era, we may find the origin of the long line of

Eabbis and scribes to whom is due the fixing of the Hebrew text

in the form in which we now^ have it. The fall of Jerusalem (a.d.

70) and the destruction of JudaBa as a nation only intensified the

zeal of the Jews for their Bible ; and the first centuries of the

Christian era witnessed a great outburst of activity in the multipli-

cation, the transmission, and the recording of traditional learning

wdth respect to the Scriptures. The two great centres of Jewish

scholarship were Palestine and Babylonia, the former having its

headquarters successively at Jamnia and Tiberias, the latter in

Babylon, where a Jewish colony had remained since the days of

the Exile. It is from the records of these schools, each of which

preserved to some extent distinct traditions of text and interpre-

tation, that we derive our earliest direct knowledge of the Hebrew

text as it existed among the Jews themselves. Indirect evidence

for an earlier time may be derived, as we shall see, from the

Samaritan and Greek translations which have come down to us

from the pre-Christian period ; but in the present chapter we are

concerned with the Hebrew text alone.

The earliest direct evidence which we possess as to the text

current among the Jews themsehes is that provided by the

               f th  Targums, or paraphrases of the Scriptures into
                     the Aramaic dialect. After then* return from the
Hebrew text :        Qg^pj^jyj^y ^he Jews gradually adopted this lan-

      e argums.

guage (a tongue closely related to Hebrew, being a kindred branch

of the same Semitic family of speech, sometimes called, as in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;

30 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

margins of our Bibles, Chaldee) ; and it became thenceforth the cur-

rent language of ordinary life. Thus, it may be remarked by the
way, it was the language commonly spoken in Judgea at the time of
our Lord's life on earth. Meanwhile the ancient Hebrew remained

as the language in which the sacred books were written, being
studied and preserved by the educated and literary class among the

Jews, but becoming continually less familiar to the common folk.
Hence arose the necessity of paraphrasing the Scriptures into the
cui-rent Aramaic tongue. At first these paraphrases were simply

given by word of mouth, as in the scene described in Neh. 8. 1-8,

when Ezra read the book of the Law before the people, "and
Jeshua and Bani and Sherebiah .... the Levites, caused the
people to understand the Law " ; but subsequently the method of

interpretation was reduced to a system, and written down, and
this practically became the popular Bible of the Jewish nation.
These written paraphrases are known as "Targums," the word
itself probably meaning " paraphrase." In the form in which we
now have them, they probably represent accumulated layers of tra-
dition, going back to a time before the foundation of Christianity,
of which they show no knowledge ; but they did not reach their

present shape until a much later date. The Palestinian and Baby-
lonian schools possessed distinct Targums of their own. The best
of those that have come down to us is the Babylonian Targum on
the Pentateuch, which is ascribed to a writer named Onkelos (and
hence is cited in the Variorum Bible as OnTc.). The date of this

is rather uncertain. Onkelos is sometimes identified with Aquila,
the author of a very literal translation of the Old Testament into

Greek {see p. 52), who lived in the second century after Christ
but the best opinion seems to be that this Targum was produced

in its present shape about the third century, on the basis of an
earlier paraphrase. It is a very simple and literal translation of
the Pentateuch, and is for that reason the more useful as evidence
for the Hebrew text from which it was taken. Of the other

Targums (cited collectively as Targ. in the Variorum Bible) much
the best is that whicW bears the name of Jonathan ben Uzziel, on
               THE HEBREW TEXT.                            31

the Prophets (using that term in its technical sense, see p. 26).
It was Avi'itten about the fourth century, and is somewhat more

free than that of Onkelos. There is also a Palestinian Targum on
the Law which is ascribed, but falsely, to this same Jonathan
(hence cited as Ps.-Jon.) ; but this, which was probably not
written till the seventh century, and all the other Targums are of
small critical value compared with those of Onkelos and Jonathan.
It is not always possible to use the Targums as evidence for the
Hebrew text of the sacred books on which they are based, since

they at times paraphrase freely, inserting explanations, moderating
strong expressions, and otherwise introducing alterations. It is,

however, clear that the Hebrew text from which they were made
(that is, the text current in Judtea about the end of the first
century B.C., to which their tradition reaches back) was not iden-
tical with that which has come down to us. The student of the
Variorum Bible will find many passages in which they are quoted

as differing fi'om the received text, sometimes for the better ; e.g.
Deut. 33. 26 ; Josh. 9. 4 ; Judg. 5. 30 ; 2 Sam. 18. 13 ; 1 Kin. 13. 12 ;
Ps. 100. 3 ; Isa. 49. 5 ; etc. They have this advantage at least
over most of the other versions, that whenever we can be sure of

the Hebrew text which they represent, we know that it was a
text accepted by the leaders of criticism among the Jews them-

selves.

The period of the Targums is overlapped by that of the

Talmud. While the Targumists paraphrased the Hebrew text,

         the scholars known as the Talmudists explained
m 2. The Talmud.
         and,  commented,      .    The n.,  ^  ,,  ,   ·  .

                           on  it.           tact that  ancient

Hebrew writing the vowels were entirely omitted led, as explained

above, to the occurrence of many words and phrases in which a

different sense could be obtained according as different vowels

were supplied. Hence plenty of scope was left to the ingenuity

of the Talmudists, who gradually accumulated a mass of tra-

dition concerning the proper reading and explanation of the text.

It does not appear that they themselves did much towards

fixing the actual} text which ajfpears in the manuscripts. On the
32 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

contrary, even in the earliest among the writings of the Talmud,

the quotations from Scripture generally agree with our received

text ; the existence of a settled text of the Scriptures seems to be

implied, and the most minute rules are laid down to ensure

the faithful copying of this text by the scribes. The Talmudist

scholars did not by any means confine their attention to textual

matters ; on the contrary, the Talmud contains the essence of
many generations of traditional commentary of all kinds on the

sacred books, concentrated and approved by the judgment of the

leading scholars of the period.

    The Talmudist period extends from about a.d. 270 to 50(», and

is succeeded by that of the Massoretes. This is the final and
                        decisive stage in the history of the Hebrew text.

                     ^^^^^ about the beginning of the seventh century

    retes*^^""

                 the scholars whom we now call the Massoretes set

themselves to sift out from the mass of the Talmud the traditions

which bore on the actual text of the sacred books. Hitherto,

although the Talmudists had accumulated a great quantity of

tradition concerning the correct vowel-punctuation of the Hebrew,

the vowel-points had not been introduced into the manuscripts in

use, and the textual traditions of the Talmudists were not separated

from the exegetical or explanatory. The work of the Massoretes

was to edit the Old Testament books in accordance with the tradi-

tions preserved in the Talmud. The head-quarters of the school

of  Jewish  doctors  which  undertook  this  labour  was  at  Tiberias
                                                                                                 ;

but it was not the work of a single generation or of a single

place. The text was provided with points to indicate the vowels ;
and this in itself went far towards fixing the interpretation of

doubtful passages. In addition, the body of traditional remarks

handed down from previous generations was recorded, so far as it

related to strictly textual matters, with additions by the Massoretes

themselves, and the whole of this textual commentary received the
name of the " Massoi-ah," which means " tradition." So far were

the Massoretes from introducing alterations into the actual text of

the sacred books, that, even where the traditional text was plainly
               THE HEBREW TEXT.                               33

wrong, they confined themselves to stating in the margin the

reading which they held to be superior. Such variations were

known by the names of Kri ("read") and Kthib ("written"), the

latter being the reading of the text, the former that of the margin,

which was to be substituted for the other when the passage was

read. The Massorah is generally found in manuscripts in the

margins of the pages, surrounding the text ; and according as it
is given in a fuller or a more abbreviated form it is called the

Greater or the Lesser Massorah. Sometimes both are found

together. Thus in our illustration of a Hebrew MS. (Plate IV.) the

Lesser Massorah is written in the margins to the left of the columns,

and the Grreater Massorah at the top and bottom of the page.

Besides recording varieties of reading, tradition, or conjecture,

the Massoretes undertook a number of calculations which do not

enter into the ordinary sphere of textual criticism. They num-

bered the verses, words, and letters of every book. They calculated

the middle word and the middle letter of each. They enumerated

verses which contained all the letters of the alphabet, or a certain

number of them ; and so on. These trivialities, as we may rightly

consider them, had yet the effect of securing minute attention to

the precise transmission of the text ; and they are but an excessive

manifestation of a respect for the sacred Scriptures which in itself

deserves nothing but praise. The Massoretes were indeed anxious

-- that not one jot nor tittle not one smallest letter nor one tiny
-- part of a letter of the Law should pass away or be lost.

The importance of the Massoretic edition to us lies in the fact

that it is still the standard text of the Hebrew Bible. All the

 The extant    extant manuscripts of the Hebrew Old Testament
Hebrew Text    contain substantiallii a Massoretic text.

    entirely                                                                                 "^
  Massoretic.
                  When once that revision was completed, such

precautions were taken to secure its preservation, to the

exclusion of any other form of text, as to make it certain that

the text has been handed down to us, not indeed without any

errors or variations, but without essential corruption. Extraordi-

nary care was taken to secure perfect accuracy in the transcription

S 2764.                          C
34 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

of the sacred books. Especially was this the case with the si/na-

gogue rolls, or copies of the Pentateuch intended for use in the

synagogues. These were written on skins, fastened together so

as to form a roll, never in modern book form. Minute regu-

lations are laid down in the Talmud for their preparation.

              "A .  sjyna&googue roll must be written on the skins

The copying of

Hebrew            of clean animals, prepared for the particular use

                  of the synagogue by a Jew. These must be

fastened together with strings taken from clean animals. Every

skin must contain a certain number of columns, equal throughout

the entire codex.* The length of each column must not extend

over less than forty-eight, or more than sixty lines ; and the
breadth must consist of thirty letters. The whole copy must be

first lined ; and if three words be written in it without a line, it
is worthless. The ink should be black, neither red, green, nor

any other colour, and be prepared according to a definite receipt.

An authentic copy must be the exemplar, from which the tran-
scriber ought not in the least to deviate. No word or letter, not

even a yod, must be written from memory, the scribe not having

looked at the codex before him  Between every consonant

the space of a hair or thread must intervene ; between every word
the breadth of a narrow consonant ; between every new parshiah.,

or section, the breadth of nine consonants ; between every book,

three lines. The fifth book of Moses must terminate exactly with

a line ; but the rest need not do so. Besides this, the copyist

must sit in full Jewish dress, wash his whole body, not begin to

write the name of God with a pen newly dipped in ink, and

should a king address him while writing that name he must take

no notice of him    The rolls in which these regulations are

not observed are condemned to be buried in the ground or burned;

or they are banished to the schools, to be used as reading-books." f

   * " Codex " is a Greek word, meaning properly a manuscript arranged in
book form. It is, however, often used simply as equivalent to "manuscript "

generally.

    t Davidson, Introduction to the Old Testament, 1856, p. 89.
THE HEBREW TEXT.  35

     Private or common copies were not subject to such precise
  regulations. They are written in book form, sometimes on

  vellum, sometimes on paper. Inks of various colours are used,
 and the size of the columns is not necessarily uniform. The
 Hebrew text is often accompanied by an Aramaic paraphrase,
 arranged either in a parallel column or between the lines of the
  Hebrew. In the upper and lower margins (generally speaking)

 the Great Massorah may be written ; in the external side margins

 are notes, comments, corrections, and indications of the divisions
 of the test ; between the columns is the Lesser Massorah. Vowel
 points and accents, which are forbidden in synagogue rolls, are
 generally inserted in private copies ; but they were always written
 separately, after the consonant-text had been finished.

     It is under conditions such as these that the Massoretic text
 has been handed down, from manuscript to manuscript, until the

 invention of printing. Now what of the actual manuscripts

 which are still in existence, stored away among the treasures of

 our great libraries ?
    It is generally rather a shock when one first learns that the

oldest extant manuscripts of the Hebrew Old Testament are no
                         earlier than the ninth century after Christ. That

       MSS. ittl^^ ^^ ^^ ^^li ^^^®y ^^® some five hundred years later

                     than the earliest manuscripts of the Greek New
Testament, and that although the books of the New Testament

were written several centuries later than those of the Old. Over a
thousand years separate our earliest Hebrew manuscripts from the
date at which the latest of the books contained in them was origi-

nally written. It is a disquieting thought to those who know how
much a text may be corrupted or mutilated in the course of trans-
mission by manuscript over a long period of time ; how easy it is
for copyists to make mistakes, and how difficult it often is to
correct them subsequently. In the case of the Old Testament,

however, there are several considerations which greatly mitigate
this disquietude, and which account for the disappearance of the
earlier manuscripts.

                                                                                        C2
36 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

In the first place, the extreme care with which manuscripts were

written, as described above, is a guarantee against serious errors

               having crept into all the copies which have come

tut faithful.                    ^.  m1,he              orf            ,-

               down to us.                  comparison       existing      manu-

scripts does indeed show that, in spite of all precautions, variations

have arisen ; but as a rule they are not of much importance.
Scholars are generally agreed that from a comparison of manu-

scripts, especially of those from the ninth to the twelfth centuries,

which are the oldest that we have, the Massoretic text can be

ascertained with almost complete certainty. The Massoretic text,

as we have seen, is substantially the same as that which we find

used by the writers of the Talmud, and the way in which the

writers of the Talmud speak of it shows that it had been in

We existence for some time previously.      are thus able to conclude

that the manuscripts which we now possess have preserved for us

a text which was current in or soon after the time of our Lord.

One eminent modern writer declares that all our existing Hebrew

manuscripts descend from a single copy made in the reign of

Hadrian (a.d. 102-117), at the time of the great persecution of

the Jews by that emperor ; and most scholars would agree that the

origin of the Massoretic text goes back, at any rate, to somewhere

about that time. It is for the period before that date that the

evidence of the Hebrew manuscripts fails us. They do not carry

us back so far as the time of the actual composition of the several

books of the Old Testament ; but within their limits their evidence

may be accepted as trustworthy.

The same extreme care which was devoted to the transcription

of manuscripts is also at the bottom of the disappearance of the

                     earlier copies. When a manuscript had been

of oWe^r^coides. copied with the exactitude prescribed by the
                      Talmud, and had been duly verified, it was

accepted as "authentic and regarded as being of equal value with

any other copy. If all were equally correct, age gave no advantage

to a manuscript ; on the contrary, age was a positive disadvantage,

since a manuscript was liable to become defaced or damaged in the
                     THE HEBREW TEXT.  37

A lapse of time.  damaged or imperfect copy was at once con-

demned as unfit for use. Attached to each synagogue was a

*' Gheniza," or himber-cupboard, in which defective manuscripts

were laid aside ; and from these receptacles some of the oldest
manuscripts now extant have in modern times been recovered.

Thus, far from regarding an older copy of the Scriptures as more"

valuable, the Jewish habit has been to j^refer the newer, as being

the most perfect and free from damage. The older copies, once

consigned to the "Gheniza," naturally perished, either from
neglect or from being deliberately buried when the " Gheniza "

became overcrowded.

The absence of very old copies of the Hebrew Bible need not,

therefore, either surprise or disquiet us. If, to the causes already

enumerated, we add the repeated persecutions (involving much

destruction of property) to which the Jews have been subject, the

disappearance of the ancient manuscripts is adequately accounted

for, and those which remain may be accepted as preserving that

which alone they profess to preserve, namely the Massoretic text.

There is consequently not much to be said in the way of description
of individual manuscripts. When we oome to speak of the Greek
text, whether of the Old or of the New Testament, we shall find it

both interesting and important to describe the chief manuscripts

with some minuteness, in resjject of their age, their comparative

value, and the groups or families into w^hicli they fall. In none

of these respects is it possible to distinguish effectually between

Hebrew manuscripts. The reader of the Variorum Bible will

easily see this for himself ; for whereas in the New Testament the

readings of a considerable number of manuscripts are cited indi-

vidually, each manuscript being distinguished by its own letter, in

the Old Testament no manuscript is named individually. Since

all represent the same type of text, and none is consj)icuously older

thahi the rest, there is little opportunity for marked pre-eminence.

Moreover, even the best authorities differ widely both as to the age

and the relative value of different copies, so that we have no certain

ground beneath our feet.
38 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

The points to be taken into consideration in examining a

Hebrew  manuscript  are  the   following                                            but it will  be seen that
                                                                                 ;

        -- their importance is not very great : First, whether

^^ Hebrew MSS? ^^   intended   for public or private                                             use                   since
                                                                                                                    ;

        those intended for the service of the synagogue,

like the great leather rolls of the Law, are most likely to be ac-

curately copied. Next, its age ; but on this head it is difficult' to

arrive at any certainty. Many manuscripts contain a statement of

their date ; but these statements are extremely misleading and of

doubtful authenticity. Sometimes we do not know by what era

the date is calculated ; sometimes the date is evidently that of the

manuscript from which it was copied, not of the manuscript itself ;

sometimes, unfortunately, the date is simply fraudulent. And it is

not possible always to test such statements by the handwriting of

the manuficript, as can generally be done with Greek writings.

The best authorities differ so widely (in the case of one well-

known manuscript, one good authority assigns it to the tenth

century, and another to the fourteenth, while another copy has

been assigned to various dates between the sixth and the fifteenth

centuries) as to prove that the science of dating Hebrew writing is

very imperfect. It is more possible to distinguish the country in

which a manuscript has been written ; but even so our advantage
is small ; for while the Jews themselves have generally held manu-

scripts wi'itten in Spain to be the best, two most distinguished

scholars (the Englishman Kennicott, and the Italian De Rossi)

prefer those which were made in Germany. Finally, manuscripts

may be distinguished as containing an Eastern or a Western text,

the former being derived from the school of Babylonia, the latter

from that of Palestine. Each of these schools had its own Talmud,

each had a different system of vowel-punctuation, and each had a

certain number of textual variations peculiar to itself, which are

recorded in several manuscripts ; but these very rarely affect the

sense to any material extent.

Probably the oldest manuscript now in existence of any part of

the Hebrew Bible is one that was recently acquired by the British
                                      --

PLATE IV.

i,
I

                                                                        n «'-:;- <l'Bv>»tM)n-j.i'B\it,-,)i-.\3,V,i

    'J^!^ <'«W>'?^ T'^^njij >i Tij.,. . h^,n, ,jl,« n,fl, lyi li>»» -J

     Hebrew MS. 9th Cent.

    (Original size, \Q\ in. x 13 in.)
             THE HEBREW TEXT.                      39

Museum, and of which a page is reproduced in Plate IV. It is

             not dated, but its writing is of an earlier type than

extant MSS.  ^^^^ °^ ^^^® earliest copies of which the precise
             date is known, and it is consequently supposed

to have been written not later than the ninth century. It contains

the Pentateuch, written in book form (not as a roll), and is im-

perfect at the end. Both Greater and Lesser Massorah have been

added in the margins, the former at the top and bottom, the

latter at the side. The text is furnished with vowel-points and

accents ; the Massorah is without them in some places, but in

others, contrary to the usual practice, it has them. The passage

shown in the plate is the end of Genesis and the beginning of

Exodus (Gen. 50. 23--Exod. 2. 14).

The oldest manuscript containing a precise statement of its

date which can be trusted is the St. Petersburg manuscript of

the Prophets. This was written in the year 916, and contains
the " Later Prophets," written on vellum, in double columns, with

the Massorah between, below, and on the outer margin. The

accents and vowel-points are written above the letters, instead of

below, according to a system in use at Babylon. The text is

correctly written, and furnishes a strong proof of the truth of the

assertion that all extant Hebrew MSS. are descended from a single

copy ; for although it contains an Eastern text, while the com-

monly-received text is based on Western MSS. (no Babylonian

MSS. having been known to exist until within the last thirty

years), and although it only came to light quite recently, long

after the formation of the received text, yet on a comparison of

it with a standard edition of the latter in a single book, that of

Ezekiel (in which the Massoretic text is certainly often corrupt),

it was found to contain only sixteen real variations from it.*

Similarly, the British Museum MS. of the Pentateuch is substan-

tially in full agreement with the received text.

Although these two copies have been described as the oldest

* Cornill, Bas Buck des Propketen Ezechiel, p. 9.
                                                                                                                                         ;

40 QUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

now in existence, there are many others which claim a consider-

ably earlier date. There are quite a large number of such in

Russia, one of which purports to have been corrected in the year

580, while others are dated 489, 639, 764, 781, 789, 798, besides

many of the ninth and tenth centuries. Unfortunately these dates

are universally discredited, and most of them are known to be

due to the fraudulent enterprise of a Jew named Firkowitzsch.

A manuscript in the Cambridge University Library bears the date

of 856, and the correctness of this date has been maintained by at

least one capable scholar ; but it is not generally accepted. Of

other manuscripts perhaps the most notable are (1) the Codex
Ben-Asher, now at Aleppo, supposed to have been written in the

tenth century, and held to be one of the best authorities for the

text of the Old Testament, though both its age and its value have

been  strongly questioned                                                                                     (2)  Codex  Laudianus, at  Oxford, con-
                                                                                                           ;

taining the whole Old Testament except a large part of Genesis,

numbered 1 by Kennicott, and held by him to have been written

in the tenth century and to contain a very important text

(3) No. 634 in the list of De Rossi, containing the Pentateuch,
assigned by him to the eighth century, by others to the tenth or

later. It seems useless to extend the list, in view of the great

doubts attaching to all dates, and to the general unimportance

of the divergencies.

One other source of knowledge for the Hebrew text should,

however, be mentioned, namely, readings quoted in the Middle

      Ages from manuscripts since lost. The chief of

      these is a manuscript known as the Codex Hillelis,

which was at one time supposed to date back to the great teacher

Hillel, before the time of our Lord. It is, however, probable that it

was really written after the sixth century. It was used by a Jewish

scholar in Spain, and a considerable number of its readings have

been preserved by references to it in various writers. Other lost

manuscripts are sometimes quoted, but less often, and their testi-

mony is less important.

The first portion of the Hebrew Bible to appear in print was the
                      THE HEBREW TEXT.  41

Psalms, which issued from the press, probably at Bologna in Italy,

            in 1477. The firet complete Old Testament fol-

HebrJw^ext  lowed in 1488, at Soncino. Both these editions
            were due to Jews. The first edition prepared by

a Christian scholar was that which appeared in the great Bible

printed by Cardinal Ximenes at Alcala (and hence known as the

Complutensian Bible, from Complutum, the Latin name of

Alcala), in Spain, during the years 1514-1517. In this Bible

^ the HftlTrPTy^ (IrppV, flTir{ Latin texts were printed side by

side ; and it forms, as will be seen more fully hereafter, a most

important landmark in the story of the beginnings of Biblical

study in modern Europe. It was not, however, until the end of

the eighteenth century that scholara fairly took in hand the critical

study of the Hebrew text. The first collection of the evidence was

made by Bishop Kennicott, who published at Oxford in 1776-80

the readings of no less than 634 Hebrew manuscripts (giving,

however, only the consonants, without vowel points). He was

followed, in 1784-8, by the Italian scholar De Rossi, who published

collations of 825 more manuscripts. De Rossi used better MSS.,

on the whole, than Kennicott, but the general result of the labours

of both is the same. It is to them that the proof is due of the

fact that all Hel)rew manuscripts represent the same text, namely

the Massoretic, and that without substantial variation. Other

manuscripts have come to light since their time, notably in Russia,

where a number of MSS. of the Babylonian type were discovered

within our own day ; but, as has been shown above in the case of
the most important of these, the St. Petersburg MS. of the Pro-

phets, the conclusion established by Kennicott and De Rossi

remains undisturbed.

   The result of our examination of the Hebrew text is, then, this.

We have manuscripts which collectively give us a good represen-

            tation of a text which reached its final shape about

ofresnlts!  We ^^^ seventh century.  also have evidence that

            the scholars who made this final revision did not

substantially alter the text which had been in use for some five
42 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

centuries previously. "We may therefore be satisfied that the text of

our Old Testament has been handed down without serious change

from about a.d. 100. Further back we cannot go with the aid of

the Hebrew manuscripts alone. The great, indeed all-important,

-- question which now meets us is this Does this Hebrew text, which

we call Massoretic, and which we have shown to descend from a

text drawn up about a.d. 100, faithfully represent the Hebrew text

as originally written by the authors of the Old Testament books ?

To answer this question it is necessary to bring up our second line

We of authorities, described in Chapter II.  must refer to those

translations of the Old Testament into other languages which were

We made before the date at which we have arrived.  must see

what evidence they can give us as to the Hebrew text from which

they were translated, and examine the extent and credibility of

that evidence. In this way alone can we hope to bridge over the

gap in our knowledge between the actual composition of the books

of the Old Testament and the text whose descent from about the

first century of the Christian era has been traced in this present

chaptei-.
       ( 43 )

       CHAPTER V.

       THE ANCIENT VEESIONS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.

~rN August 1883 the world was startled by the announcement

-- of a discovery which, if it were authentic, seemed to go far
towards bridging the great gap in our knowledge of which we

spoke at the end of the last chapter. This was no less than some

fragments of a manuscript of the Old Testament purporting to

have been written about eight hundred years before Christ, which
their owner, a Jew of the name of Shapira, stated that he had
obtained from some Arabs about five years before. The material

was old leather, and the writing was similar to that of the Moabite
Stone. The contents were striking enough. They purported to

be portions of the Book of Deuteronomy, but with many remark-
able variations. To the Ten Commandments was added an

eleventh, and the language of the others was altered and amplified.

In these strips of leather there was enough to cast doubt upon

the whole of the received text of the Old Testament and to dis-
credit the whole science of textual criticism o The sensation,
however, only lasted a few days. Evidences of forgery soon
began to pour in ; and the final blow was given when iC was
shown that the strips of leather on which the characters were
written had been cut from the margins of an ordinary synagogue

roll.

There is, indeed, no probability that we shall ever find manu-

scripts of the Hebrew text going back to a period before the

We formation of the text which we know as Massoretic.  can

only arrive at an idea of it by a study of the earliest trans-

lations made from it ; and our task in the present chapter is to

describe these translations in turn.
44 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

           -- § 1. The Samaritan Pentateuch.

   The version of the Old Testament which possesses the longest
pedigree is that which owes its existence to the Samaritans.

                             Strictly speaking, it is not a version at all, as it

                        is in the Hebrew tongue, though written in a
different character from that of the extant Hebrew MSS. It is
written in the old Hebrew character, such as it was before the
adoption by the Jews of the square characters, as described in the
last chapter (p. 24). The precise origin of this separate Samaritan
Bible has been a subject of dispute ; but the most probable account
is that it takes its rise in the events described in Neh, 13. 23-30,
namely, the expulsion by Nehemiah of those Jews who had
contracted mamages with the heathen. Among those expelled
was a grandson of the high-priest Eliashib, whose name, as we
learn from Josephus, was Manasseh. This Manasseh, in indigna-
tion at his expulsion, took refuge among the Samaritans, and set
up among them a rival worehip to that at Jerusalem. The

Samaritans, whom we know from 2 Kings 17. 24-41 to have been

foreigners imported into the country of the Ten Tribes by the
king of Assyria, and there, presumably, to have mingled with the
scanty remnant of Israelites, had at first incorporated the worship
of Jehovah, as the God of the land, into the worship of their own
gods ; and later, on the return of the Jews from captivity, had
been willing to join in the rebuilding of the Temple at Jerusalem,
but had been refused permission. Since this repulse they had
been bitterly hostile to the Jews, and the schism of Manasseh
gave them a head and a rival worship, which embittered and per-
petuated the quarrel. Manasseh obtained leave from Darius
 Nothus, king of Persia, to set up a temple on Mount Gerizim,
 which became the centre of the new religion and the rival of

Jerusalem. He had brought with him, it. is believed, the Hebrew

 Pentateuch, and this, Avith certain alterations (notably the substi-
tution of Gerizim for Ebal in Dent. 27. 4 as the hill on which the
memorial altar should be placed), became the sacred book of the
                THE SAMARITAN PENTATEUCH.  45

Samaritans. As we have seen in the last chapter, probably this

was the only part of the Old Testament which had at that time

been definitely recognised as inspired Scripture by the Jews them-

selves ; and when the Prophets and Hagiographa were subse-
quently added to the Canon, the Samaritans refused to accept

them. They refused also to accept the square Hebrew characters

adopted by the Jews ; and we may be quite certain that they

would pay little respect to any alterations in the text, if such

there were, which were made by Jewish scribes and scholars after

the date of the original secession.

So far, then, it appears as if we had, in the Samaritan Pen-

tateuch, an invaluable means of testing the extent of the variation

IIjS discoV6TV  which the Hebrew text has undergone since the

                days of Nehemiah. We have an independent tra-

dition, coming down from about B.C. 408 (the date of Manasseh's-

secession), without any contact with the Hebrew text, preserving

the original form of -wTiting, and thereby avoiding one consider-

able source of possible error and corruption. No wonder that

when, in 1616, the first copy of the Samaritan Bible came to
light many scholars thought that they had obtained evidence for

the original text of the Old Testament far preferable to that of

the Hebrew manuscripts. The Samaritan community had existed

from the days of its first settlement by Sargon of Assyria until

then, and it exists still, a little community of about a hundred

persons, settled at Nablous, the ancient Shechem, and still observ-

ing the Mosaic Law ; but none of their sacred books had come ta

light until, in that year, a copy was obtained by Pietro della Valle.

Several other copies have since been secured by travellers and are
now in European libraries. The first printed edition was issued

in the Paris Polyglott Bible in 1632, and for generations a hot

controversy raged among Biblical scholars as to the comparative

value of the Samaritan and Hebrew texts. At length, in 1815,

it was settled, for the time, by an elaborate examination of all the

variations by the great Hebrew scholar Gesenius, whose ver-
dict was wholly against the Samaritan version. He divided the

variations into groups, according to their character, and argued that
                                           ;

46 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANU8CRIFTS.

in hardly a single instance was a Samaritan reading to be pre-
ferred to that of the Hebrew. This opinion has held the field

until the present day ; but there seems to be a disposition now

to question its justice.

The Samaritan version has been estimated to differ from the

Hebrew in about 6,000 places. The great majority of these are of

s c arac er.  very trifling importance, consisting of gramma-
              ^.^^^ alterations or the substitution of Samaritan

idioms for Hebrew. Others (as in Deut. 27. 4, quoted above) are

alterations of substance, so as to suit Samaritan ideas of ritual or

religion. Others contain supplements of apparent deficiencies by

the help of similar passages in other books, repetitions of speeches

and the like from parallel passages, the removal of obscm-ities or

insertion of explanatory words or sentences, or distinct differences

of reading. In all these latter cases there may evidently be
two opinions as to whether the Samaritan or the Hebrew read-
ing is preferable. The apparent deficiencies in the Hebrew may
be real, the obscurities may be due to error, and the Samaritan
text may be nearer to the original language. This probability
is greatly increased when we find that in many passages where

the Samaritan version differs from the Hebrew, the Greek Septua-
gint version (of which we shall speak presently) agrees with the
former. For example, the Samaritan and Hebrew texts differ
very frequently as to the ages of the patriarchs mentioned in the
early chapters of Genesis. Gesenius classified these variations as
alterations introduced on grounds of suitability ; but it is at least
possible that they are not alterations at all, but the original text,
and that the numbers have become corrupt in the Hebrew text
and this possibility is turned into a probability when we find the
Septuagint supporting the Samaritan readings. There is no

satisfactory proof of either the Septuagint or the Samaritan text
having been corrected from the other, nor is it in itself likely ; and

their independent evidence is extremely difficult to explain away.

Hence scholars are now becoming more disposed to think favour-
ably of the Samaritan readings. Many of them may be errors,
many more may be unimportant, but there remain several which
   mmfmff^^mm           ^J}4.     jm~

              f^r-r-

tv ? I r rg ."I       S ?'? E ? ^. 'flij^?'^

5

^·.T?'^

                                                  fin

       3!!!li|.                                   R Ji $ n*i

tr * & V \^ ^  ...y <r'*<n If i<  v^ % r*^  !^'^

H rib - ^

« r ·  tf                         ?mj

Mv^^ t « <r n
:£v V
1      I V to  t> It
THE SAMARITAN PENTATEUCH.                           47

are of real value. The editors of the YarionTm Bible give thirty-

five variations of the Samaritan text in the five books of the

Pentateuch as being either equal or superior to the Hebrew

readings. Among these may be mentioned, for the sake of

example, Gen. 4. 8, where the Samaritan has " Cain said to

Abel his brother, Let us go into the field"; 47. 21, "As for

the people he made slaves of them," instead of "he removed
them to cities " ; Exod. 12. 40, the 430 years of the sojourning

of the children of Israel are said to have been in Egypt

and in Canaan (thus agreeing with Gal. 3. 17), instead of in
Egypt only ; Num. 4. 14, the following words are added at the

end of the verse, " And they shall take a cloth of purple, and cover

the laver and his foot, and put it into a covering of seals' skins,
and shall put them upon a frame " ; and in Dent. 32. 35 the first
half of the verse runs " against the day of vengeance and recom-

pence ; against the time when their foot shall slip." These are

perhaps the most notable of the Samaritan variants, and it is

observable that in every case the Septuagint confirms them. The

general result of the comparison of this and the other versions

with the Hebrew text must be reserved to the end of the chapter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ;

meanwhile it will be sufficient to observe that these variations,

though sufficient to arouse our interest, are not serious enough to

cause any disquietude as to the substantial integrity of the text of

our Old Testament.

N"o manuscript of the Samaritan Bible (so far as is known) is

older than the tenth century. It is true the Samaritan community

at Nablous cherishes a precious roll, which it

^ s manus i s.                                      j^^^g i^ggj^ written by Abisha, the
                                    jj^j^jj^^^jj^g

great-grandson of Moses, in the thirteenth year after the conquest

of Canaan ; but this story, which rests on the authority of an

inscription said to be found in the MS. itself, may very safely be
dismissed. The MS., of which a photograph forms our frontis-

piece, is written in letters of gold, and is rolled upon sUver

rollers with round knobs at the top. The MS. of which we give

a reproduction in Plate Y. is at Eome, and is said to have

been written in the year 1227. It will be seen that the three
48 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

columns are all in the same style of writing, but each contains
a different dialect. The right-hand column contains the Hebrew
text of Gen. 47. 1-6, as preserved among the Samaritans ; it is,
in fact, what is commonly called the Samaritan Version, and what
we have been describing above. The left-hand column contains a
Samaritan Targum, or paraphrase of the text in the current Samari-
tan dialect ; and in the centre is an Arabic translation of the
Samaritan version, originally made in the year 1070. All three
columns are \vritten in the Samaritan or old Hebrew characters, and
represent the form of ^vi'iting in which the books of the Old
Testament were originally written down. All the existing manu-
scripts of the Samaritan version are written on either vellum or paper
(in this instance vellum is used), in the shape of books (not rolls,
with the exception of three rolls at Nablous), without any vowel-
points or accents, but with punctuation to divide words and sen-
tences. The whole of the Pentateuch is divided into 964 paragraphs.

       -- § 2. The Septuagint and other Greek Versions.

   Two considerations make the Samaritan version of the Old

Testament less important than it would otherwise be. In the first
place, it contains only the Pentateuch ; and it is just this part of
the Old Testament which is best preserved in the Hebrew text,
and consequently needs least correction. Secondly, none of the
extant copies of it is older than the tenth century, so that they are
as far removed from the fountain head as the Hebrew manuscripts
themselves. Neither of these drawbacks applies to the Greek

version, of which we have now to speak. It is a complete transla-

tion of the Old Testament, containing, indeed, not only the books
which now compose our Old Testament, but also those which, after
a considerable period of uncertainty, were finally excluded from

the Hebrew Canon and now constitute our Apocrypha. Further, it

is preserved in several manuscripts of very great age, the earliest,
as we shall see presently, going back to the fourth and fifth cen-
turies after Christ. In every respect, both textually and historically,
the Greek version of the Old Testament is by far the most impor-

tant of all the ancient translations. On the one hand, it is our
                         THE SEP TUAGINT.                                       49

chief means of testing the accuracy of the Massoretic Hebrew text,

and  of  correcting  it  when  it  is  wrong                                 and, on the other, it has
                                                                          ;

been the Bible of Greek Christendom from the earliest age of

Christianity down to this present day. It will consequently require

and deserve a somewhat extended notice at our hands.

   The first questions to be answered are those that relate to its

origin. When was it made ? Why was it made ? For whom was

                      it made ? Curious as it may seem at first sight,

     Septaagint^ ^^^^ Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible was
                       made in a land which was neither Greek nor

Hebrew, namely Egypt. After the submission of Egypt to Alex-

ander the Great, and the introduction of Greek settlers under

Ptolemy, his lieutenant, Alexandria became the headquarters alike

of the commerce and the literature of the East. Its population,

mainly Greek, included also a large colony of Jews. Greek became

the common language of intercourse between people of different

nationalities in the East, and the Jews in Egypt learnt, before long,

to use it as their native tongue. Hence there arose the necessity

of having their Scriptures accessible in Greek ; and the answer to
this demand was the version known as the Septuagint. The story

which was long current as to its origin is largely mythical, but it

contains a kernel of truth. In a letter purporting to be written

by one Aristeas to his brother Philocrates, in the reign of Ptolemy

Philadelphus (B.C. 284-247), it is said that king Ptolemy, hearing

of the Jewish Scriptures, and being urged by his librarian to

obtain a copy of them for his great library at Alexandria, sent an

embassy (of which the wTiter of the letter was one) to the high

priest at Jerusalem with magnificent presents, begging him to send a
copy of the sacred books, with a body of men capable of translating

them. Thereupon six translators were selected from each of the

twelve tribes and desijatched to Alexandria, bearing with them a

copy of the Law, written in letters of gold. They were splendidly

received by the king, and, after a banquet and public display of

their wisdom, set about their task of translation, working separately

in the first instance, but afterwards comparing their results, and

S 2764.                                                                      D
50 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

finally producing the version which was thenceforth known as the

Septuagint, or the Version of the Seventy. Later generations
improved upon this story, until the legend ran that eacli of the
seventy-two translators was shut up in a separate cell (or by
pairs in 36 cells) and each produced a translation of the whole

Old Testament in exactly seventy-two days ; and when their trans-
lations were compared it was found that they all agreed precisely
with one another, in every word and every phrase, thus proving
that their version was directly inspired by God. This, how-
ever, is merely an exaggeration of the original story, which
itself is now generally believed to be an exaggeration of the real
facts, at least in respect of the special and magnificent patron-
age of Ptolemy. What is true is that the Septuagint version was
made in or about his reign, in Alexandria, and that the Pentateuch
was probably translated first. The other books were added later,
by different translators and at different times. The style of
translation differs so markedly in different books as to prove
that the whole Testament cannot have been the work of a
single group of translators, while some of the later books, such
as Ecclesiasticus, were not even written at the time of which the

story speaks.

   The Septuagint version, as finally completed, contains not merely
the books which now form our Old Testament, but also those

                           which, since the Eeformation, have been placed
                        apart in the Apocrypha.* Some of these books
(2 Esdras, the additions to Esther, Wisdom, part of Baruch, the

   * It is unfortunate that the Apocrypha is generally omitted from copies of

the English Bible. No doubt a little explanation of the nature of the books
contained in it is needed by most people, but that information is now easily
accessible in many popular handbooks, e.g., in the Kev. C. H. H. Wright's
article in the Variorum Aids to the Bible Stude.nt, The Variorum Apocrypha,

also, by the Rev. C. J. Ball, can be confidently recommended as containing ex-
cellent critical and (in the form of " various renderings ") explanatory notes.
These are especially valuable, since, in the absence (as yet) of any Eevised
Version of the Apocrypha, the ordinary reader has no means of knowing how
far the Authorised Version is trustworthy ; and they also, of course, contain
much which no Eevised Version can possibly give.
                          THE SEPTUAGINT.                                                                                    51

Song of the Three Children, 2 Maccabees) never existed in

Hebrew at all ; but the others were originally written in Hebrew
and circulated among the Jews for some time on very much the

same footing as some of the books which form the section of the

Hagiographa (p. 28). They never, however, attained the same
position of authority, and when the Canon of the Old Testament

was finally closed, they were left outside. From this point dates

their  disappearance  in  their  Hebrew form                                                                 they ceased to  be
                                                                                                          ;

copied in Hebrew ; and so they have come down to us only in the

Greek, or in translations made from the Greek. Jerome rejected

them from his Latin Bible because they were not extant in

Hebrew ; but the older Latin translations of them were subse-

quently incorporated into the Vulgate, and they have remained in

the Latin Bible of the Roman Church to the present day. The

Septuagint is, however, their real home, and there they take their

proper places among the books of the Old Testament. The First

Book of Esdras takes precedence of the Book of Ezra, of which it

is an alternative version with some additions. After the Book of

Xehemiah (which, in conjunction with the canonical Ezra, is

called the Second Book of Ezra) come, in the principal manuscript

of the Septuagint, the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of

Solomon, Job, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus (or the Wisdom of Sirach),

Esther (including the parts now banished to the Apocrypha),

Judith, Tobit. Then follow the Prophets ; but Jeremiah is

succeeded by Baruch, Lamentations, and the Epistle of Jeremiah

(=Banich, ch. 6), and Daniel by Susanna and Bel and the Dragon.

Finally the Old Testament is concluded by the books of the

Maccabees, of which there are, in some of the earliest copies, four

instead of only two.

   When the Septuagint translation was completed, it became at

once the Bible of the Greek-speaking Jews, and circulated in

                   Palestine and Asia as well as in Egypt, the home

Greek-^peakhig of its birth. At the time of our Lord's life on

Jews and the earth, Greek was the literary language of Pales-
Christian Church.     '                    j                                                                 &&

                   tine, as Aramaic was the spoken language of the

                                                                                                                 D2
62 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

common people. Hebrew was known only to the small class of

students, headed by the Rabbis and the scribes. All the books of

the New Testament (with the possible exception of the Gospel

of St. Matthew in its original form) were written in Greek ; and
most of the quotations from the Old Testament which appear in
them are taken from the Septuagint version, not from the original
Hebrew. As Christianity spread beyond the borders of Palestine,
Greek was necessarily the language in which it appealed alike to
the Jew and to the Gentile ; and when, in speaking to the former,
it based its claim on the fulfilment of prophecy, it was in the
language of the Septuagint version that the prophecies were quoted.
The Christian Church adopted the Septuagint as its own Book of
the Old Covenant, and looked to that as its Bible long before
it had come to realise that its own writings would take a place

beside it as equally sacred Scripture.

    The result of this appropriation of the Septuagint by the Chris-
tian Church was that the Jews cast it off. "When the Christians

                         in controversy pressed them with quotations from
      tions in the the Prophets, of which the fulfilment had been

                          found in Jesus Christ, the Jews took refuge in a
 denial of the accuracy of the Septuagint translation. In the
 second century of our era this repudiation took form in the pro-
 duction of rival versions. The Hebrew text had been fixed, in
 the form in which it has come down to us, in the preceding
 century, and what was now needed was a faithful translation of
 this into Greek for the use of Greek-speaking Jews. The pro-

                           duction of such a translation was the work of

                       Aquila, who may be identical with the Onkelos
 to whom is ascribed the principal Targum on the Pentateuch
 (see p. 30). The name is the same, in a Latin dress, and the
 spirit in which the translation was executed is the same. The

 version of Aquila is an exceedingly bald and literal rendering of
 the Hebrew, adhering to the original so closely as to lose most of
  the Greek idiom, and often falling into obscurity and even non-
  sense. Aquila is said to have been a disciple of the celebrated
                                               THE SEPTUAGINT.                                                                     bZ

Rabbi Akiba, the chief and leader of the extremest anti-Christian

Jews at the end of the first century, and liis version, which must

have been made somewhere about the year 150, became the official

Greek translation of the Scriptures in use among the non-Chris-

tian Jews. Later in the same century another translation was

^ ,,,  ,    .        made,                     upon    the  oprpiosite                           side,              byj  Theodotion,                                                         a
                                            >      i'                                                                                                                                     »
2. Theodotion.                                                                                                   j

                     Christian, said to have been a native of Ephesus.

Theodotion's translation resembled Aquila's in being based upon

the authorised Jewish text of the Old Testament (though retain-

ing the apocryphal additions to the Book of Daniel), but was exactly

contrary in its treatment of it, being very free in its rendering of

the original. Naturally enough, it received no countenance from

the Jews, but it obtained much popularity among Christians, and

exercised a considerable influence upon the subsequent history of

the Septuagint. Notably was this the case in respect of the Books

of Daniel and Job. Theodotion's version of Daniel was so much

preferred to that of the Septuagint, that it actually took its place

in the manuscripts of the Septuagint itself, and the original

Septuagint version has only come down to us in one single copy,

w'ritten in the ninth century. In the case of Job, the Septuagint

version did not contain many passages (amounting to about

one-sixth of the book in all) which appear in the received or

Massoretic     text  of  the                   Hebrew                                       and  these were              supplied  in the
                                                                                         ;

Septuagint from the version of Theodotion. It is possible that

something of the same sort may have occun'ed in other books,

but the proof is at present incomplete. Yet one other Greek

version of the Old Testament remains to be mentioned, that

                     of Symmachus, which was made about the year

                     200, The special feature* of this translation is

the literary skill and taste with which the Hebrew phrases of

the original are rendered into good and idiomatic Greek. In

this respect Symmachus approaches nearer than any of his

rivals to the modern conception of a translator's duty ; but he

had less influence than any of them on the history of the Greek

Bible. Curiously enough, he had more influence upon the Latin
54 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS. '

Bible ; for Jerome made considerable use of him in the preparation

of the Yiilgate.

At the beginning of the third century there were thus three

Greek versions of the Old Testament in existence, besides the
                        Septuagint itself. The next step, and one of

^'sepSgint?' i^^^ch importance in the history of the Greek
1. Origen's Hexa- text, was taken by the great Alexandrian scholar,

                   Origen, whose life occupies the first half of the

third century (a.d. 186-253). Finding all these various, and often
conflicting, versions of the Scriptures existing side by side, he
determined to draw them together, and to try to use them for the
production of one more perfect version than them all. Accord-
ingly, with that stupendous energy which earned for him the
admiration of his contemporaries and of posterity, he set about the
colossal work to which was given the name of the HexcqiJa, or
"sixfold" version of the Old Testament Scriptures. In six

parallel columns, at each opening of his book, were arrayed the

-- following six different versions : (1) The Hebrew text then

current (substantially identical with the Massoretic text) ; (2) the

Hebrew text in Greek letters ; (3) the Greek translation of Aquila

(placed  here  as  being  the  nearest                                                     to  the  Hebrew  in  fidelity)
                                                                                                                                                      ;

(4) the translation of    Symmachus                                                        (5) the Septuagint, as revised
                                                                                        ;

by Origen himself ; (6) the translation of Theodotion, coming last

in the series as being the furthest removed in style from the

original.* The last four columns seem to have existed in a

separate form, known as the Tetrapla, or fourfold version, which

was probably a later reproduction in handier size of the more

important part of Origen's work ; but in any case the Hexapla,

whether earlier or later, is the complete and authoritative form

of it. So huge a work as this (the Old Testament is rarely

    * In some books (chiefly the poetical ones, it would seem) three other Greek
versions were appended. These were obscure translations which Origen had
discovered, and their importance seems to have been small. Very little of
them has been preserved, and their aiithors do not seem to have been known to
Origen himself. They are simply called the Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh versions.
THE SEP TUAGIST.  55

contained entire in any manuscript in a single version, and this
contained it in six !) was not likely to be copied as a whole.
The original manuscript still existed at Cajsarea at the begin-
ning of the seventh century, but it perished shortly afterwards,
and of all its columns, except the fifth, no complete repre-
sentation has come down to us. It is with this fifth column,
however, that we are principally concerned, since it contained
Origen's edition of the Septuagint, and this edition had a consider-
able influence on the text of the version in subsequent ages.
Unfortunately, Origen's efforts were not directed towards the
recovery of the original form of the Septuagint, but at bringing it
into harmony with the Hebrew text then current, and to do this
he introduced alterations into it with the utmost freedom. At the
same time he tried to indicate all such alterations by the use of
certain symbols. Passages occurring in the Septuagint which

-- were not found in the Hebrew were marked by an olyelus ( ) ;

passages occurring in the Hebrew but not in the Septuagint were
inserted in the latter from the version of Theodotion, such inser-
tions being marked by an asterisTc ()?< or -^) ; a metohelus (V)
in each case marking the end of the passage in question. For
Origen's purpose, which was the production of a Greek version
corresponding as closely as possible with the Hebrew text as then
settled, this procedure was well enough ; but for ours, which is the
recovery of the original Septuagint text as evidence for what the
Hebrew was before the formation of the Massoretic text, it was
most unfortunate, since there was a natural tendency for his
edition to be copied without the critical symbols, and thus for the
additions made by him from Theodotion to appear as part of the
genuine and original Septuagint. This has certainly happened in
some cases ; it is diflBcult to say with certainty in how many.
Fortunately we are not left without some means of discovering these

insertions, for in the year 617, shortly before the disappearance of
the original manuscript of the Hexapla, Bishop Paulus, of Telia

in Mesopotamia, made a Syriac translation of the column contain-

ing the Septuagint, copying faithfully into it the critical symbols
56 OUB BIBLE AND THE AXCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

of Origen ; and a copy of part of this, written in the eighth

century, is still extant (in the Ambrosian library at Milan),

containing the Prophets and most of the Hagiographa.* For the

Pentateuch the chief authority is a Greek manuscript at Leyden,

written  in  the  fifth  century, and  known  as  the  Codex  Sarravianus
                                                                                                                    ;

and a few other manuscripts exist, likewise containing an Origenian

text, some of which will be described below. There are thus fair

means for recovering the Septuagint column of Origen's great

work. The versions of Aquila, Theodotion, and Symmachus have,
however, for the most part perished. No manuscript exists which

contains any continuous portion of them, except those parts of

Theodotion which were incorporated in the received text of the

Septuagint ; but a very large number of individual readings have

been preserved in the margin of Septuagint MSS., and these have

been collected and arranged with great skill and care in the two

portly volumes of Dr. Field's edition of the Hexapla, published by

the Oxford University Press in 1875.

Origen's own colossal work went to the ground, but the part of

it which was most important in his eyes, and the ultimate object

-- -- of the whole the revised text of the Septuagint survived, and

had a most noteworthy influence on the subsequent history of the

version. At the beginning of the third century, we find a sudden

crop of new editions of the Septuagint, all more or less affected by

his work. Three such are known to us, and they are of great

importance for our present purpose, as we shall see when we come

to describe the form in which the Septuagint has come down to us.

Reprod,uced,  ,   These three editions are        those of (^ 1)^ Eusebius of

              oy

Eusebius and CaBsarea, (2) Lucian, (3) Hesychius. Eusebius

                  of Csesarea, the first great historian of Christia-

nity, with the assistance of his friend Pamphilus, produced

   * The Ambrosian MS. contains Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of
Solomon, and the Prophets. The first volume of this MS. was in existence in
1574:, but has since disappeared. On the other hand, fragments of other MSS.
have been discovered, and are now in the British Museum, containing Exodus
and Euth complete, and portions of Genesis, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua,
Judges, and 1 and 2 Kings.
                --

                    THE SEPTUAGINT.        hi

Origeu's text of the Septuagint (the fifth cokimn of the Hexapla)

as an independent edition, with alternative readings from the other

2. Lacian.      versions in the margin. Lucian of Samosata,

                a leading scholar at Antioch, produced another

edition, of which the most marked characteristic was his hahit,

when he found different words or phrases in different copies, to

combine them into a composite phrase, and so to preserve both.

In the next chapter we shall see reason to believe that a similar

course has been followed in the case of the New Testament at some

period of its history. Lucian suffered martyrdom during the

persecution of Maximus, in a.d. 311 ; and the same fate is believed

3. Hesycliias.      to have befallen Hesychius, the author of the
                    third edition of the Septuagint during the period

of which we are speaking. Of the character of this version very

little is known at present ; but there is reason to hope that a
fuller study of the extant manuscripts of the Septuagint may

increase our knowledge of it. These three editions were practi-
cally contemporary, and must all have been produced about the
year 300. Each circulated in a different region. The edition of

Eusebius and Pamphilus was generally used in Palestine ; that of
Lucian had its home in Antioch, and was also accepted in Con-
stantinople and Asia Minor, while Hesychius was a scholar of

Alexandria, and his edition circulated in Egypt.
   The following diagram will roughly illustrate the origin of these

three editions, and their respective degrees of approach to the
Hebrew text :

                    Original Jiact

                    Grak MSS  Eebrar MSS.
58 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

After the beginning of the fourth century the Septuagint, so far

as we know, underwent no further revision, and it is unnecessary

_,   presentX   XX    to  trace  its  history          beyond  this  proint.  In one
               state                                        j
The                                                 j

of the Septua- form or another, and gradually becoming cor-

                      rupted in all by the errors of copyists, it

continued to be, as it is to this day, the Old Testament of the

We Greek or Eastern Church.           have now to begin at the other end,

and ask in what form it has come down to us, and what means we

have of ascertaining its original text. And the method of this

inquiry must be exactly the same as we have already applied in

the case of the Hebrew text, and as we shall again have to apply

when we come to the Greek text of the New Testament. We have

to ask, primarily, in what manuscripts it has come down to us,

what are their age and character, and into what groups they can

be divided ; and then it will be necessary to ask further whether
any light can be thrown upon its history by the translations which

have been made from it in ancient times, and by the quotations

made from it by tiie early Christian Fathers.

  We have seen in the last chapter that no copy of the Hebrew

Bible now extant was written earlier than the ninth century, while

                      those of the Samaritan Pentateuch only go back

     S'uagSt!         to the tenth. The oldest copies of the Greek

                      Bible are, however, of far greater antiquity than

this, and take rank as the most venerable, as well as the most

valuable, authorities for the Bible text which now survive. The
oldest and best of them contain the New Testament as well as the

Old, and will have to be described again in greater detail (since

the New Testament portion has generally been more minutely

studied than the Old) in a subsequent chapter. But a short

account of them must be given here.

Greek manuscripts are divided into two classes, according to the

style of their writing. Putting aside those written on papyrus (of

                      which, so far as the Bible is concerned, only a

     cur^iv* MSS.     ^^^' ^m'A\\ fragments have as yet been discovered),

                      it may be said broadly that all the earlier manu-
--

THE SEPTUAGINT.  59

scripts, from the fourth century to the ninth, are written in what
is known as uncial writing, and all the later ones, from the ninth
century to the invention of printing, in cursive or minuscule writ-
ing. In uncial writing all the letters are large and are formed

-- separately {see Plates VI., YIII. XIII.) ; minuscules are small {see

Plate XIV.), and are generally linked together in a running

hand, whence they have received the name of cursive (= " run-

ning"), which is their commoner, but less exact, designation.
For convenience of reference, each manuscript has, in addition
to its name, a letter or number by which it is commonly denoted.
Uncial manuscripts are indicated by capital letters, cursives (in
the case of the Septuagint) by numbers. The former, being the
older, are generally the most valuable, and they alone require or
deserve individual description. About thirty such manuscripts

exist for the Septuagint, but many of these are mere fragments,

containing only a few leaves, and only two are even approximately
complete. The following is a list of them, in the alphabetical
order of the letters by which they are commonly indicated, with
fuller descriptions of the most important :

   i< {Aleph, the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet) stands for
the famous Codex Sinaiticns, one of the two oldest copies of the
Greek Bible. The story of the romantic discovery of this manu-
script in the present century, when part of it was in the very act
of being consumed as fuel, must be reserved for Chapter VII.
For the present it must sufiice to say that it was discovered by the
great German Biblical scholar, Constantine Tischendorf, in 1844,
in the monastery of St. Catherine, at Mt. Sinai. At his first visit
he secured forty-three leaves belonging to the Old Testament, and
presented them to his patron, King Frederick Augustus of Saxony,
who placed them in the Court Library at Leipzig, where they still

A remain, Avith the name of the Codex Friderico-Augustanus.

subsequent visit brought to light 156 more leaves of the Old

Testament and the whole of the Xew Testament ; and these ulti-

mately found a home in the Imperial Library at St. Petersburg,
and are known as the Ccdex Sinaiticus. Parts of a few more
' Cj^^O' OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

\)eaves were subsequently discovered in the bindings of other

manuscripts in the library of Mt. Sinai. The manuscript was

written in the fourth century, in a beautiful uncial hand ; and it
is extremely unfortunate that so much of the Old Testament has

been lost. The parts which survive include fragments of Genesis

23, 24, and of Num. 5, 6, 7 ; 1 Chron. 9. 27--19. 17 ; 2 Esdras

[i.e. canonical Ezra] 9. 9 to end ; Nehemiah, Esther, Tobit,

-- Judith, 1 Mace, 4 Mace, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lament. 1. 1 2. 20,

Joel, Obadiah, Jonah, Nahum to Malachi, Psalms, Proverbs,

Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Job. Four

different scribes were employed on the writing of it, besides

A several conectors.  facsimile of a page of this beautiful and

most valuable manuscript is given in Plate YIII.

A. Codex Alexandrinus, in the British Museum. This was

probably written in the first half of the fifth century, and contains

the whole Bible, except Gen. 14.  14-17;  15. 1-5,  lG-19 ;  16.  G-9
                                                                                       ;

1 Kings 12. 20--14. 9 ; Ps. 50. 20--80. 11, and some parts of the

New Testament, which have been lost through accidental mutila-

tion. It includes all four books of the Maccabees, for which it is

the principal authority. Before the Psalms are placed the Epistle

of Athanasius to Marcellinus on the Psalter, and the summary

of the contents of the Psalms by Eusebius. At the end of the

Psalms is an additional psalm (the 151st), which is found in

some other early manuscripts, and a number of canticles, or chants,

extracted from other parts of the Bible (for instance, the songs of

Moses, in Deut. 32, of Hannah, in 1 Sam. 2. 1-10, and the Magni-
ficat) which were used in the services of the Church, The apo-

cryphal Psalms of Solomon were originally added at the end of the

New Testament, but the leaves containing them have been lost.

For the history of the manuscript and a specimen of its writing,

see pp. 128-132 and Plate IX.
   B. Codex Vaticanus, in the Vatican Library at Eome. It con-

tains the whole Bible, written in the fourth century, and is at once

the oldest and probably the best extant copy of the Septuagint.

-- It is nearly perfect, wanting only Gen. 1. 1 46. 28 : 2 Kings 2. 5-7,
                                             --

                                                 THE SEPTUAGINT.  61

10-13                           Ps. 106. 27      133. 6 of its original contents, so far as the
                             ;

Old Testament is concerned ; bat the Prayer of Manasses and the
books of Maccabees were never included in it. The text of the

current editions of the Septuagint are mainly derived from this

manuscrij^t. {See pp. 132-137 and Plate X.)

   C. Codex Ephraemi, in the National Library at Paris. {See pp.
137-139 and Plate XI.) This is o, palimpsest ; that is, the original

writing has been partially washed or scraped out in order that the

-- vellum might be used again to hold some other work, in this case

a theological treatise. The result is that only parts of the original

writing can now be read ; and, in addition, most of the leaves con-
taining the Old Testament have been lost. The 64 leaves which

remain contain parts of Job, Proverbs, Eccksiastes, Wisdom,

Ecclesiasticus, and the Song of Solomon, written in the fifth

century.

The manuscripts hitherto mentioned were originally com-

plete Greek Bibles, containing both the Old and the New

Testaments. Those which follow do not appear ever to have

included the New Testament, and many of them only a portion

of the Old.

   D. The Cotton Genesis. One of the most lamentable sights in
the Manuscript Department of the British Museum is that of the
charred remains of many manuscripts of the greatest value which
were burnt in the fire among Sir R. Cotton's books in 1731.

Perhaps the most valuable of all the volumes then destroyed was
this copy of the Book of Genesis, written in a fine uncial hand of
the fifth century, and adorned with 250 illustrations in a manner

evidently derived directly from the ancient Greek style of painting.
The remains of this once beautiful manuscript still show the

general character of the writing and the miniatures, but in a

lamentably shrunken and defaced condition. Fortunately the
manuscript had been examined and its text carefully collated by

Grabe before the fire ; and from this collation its evidence for the
text of Genesis is now known.

E. The Bodleian Genesis, at Oxford. Written in the eighth
                                            --

62 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

century, but though thus considerably later than the copies hitherto
mentioned, it contains a good text. The following passages are
wanting, owing to mutilation of the manuscript : Gen. 14. G 18. 24,
20. 14--24. 54, 42. 18 to end of book.

    F. Codex Amljrosianus, at Milan. "Written in the fifth century,
with three columns to the page, and having (what is very unusual
in early manuscripts) punctuation, accents, and breathings by the

-- original scribe. It contains Gen. 31. 15 Josh. 12. 12, with many

losses, however, from mutilation, and small fragments of Isaiah

A and Malachi. Its evidence is valuable, and where and B differ

it generally agrees with A.
   G. Codex Sarravianus, at Leyden : a very fine manuscript,

probably of the fifth century, though it has sometimes been
attributed to the fourth. It is written with two columns to
the page, and (like the Vatican and Sinaitic MSS. above) h;is
no enlarged initials. It contains the Pentateuch, with portions
of Joshua and Judges, and its special characteristic is that it
contains a Hexaplar test. It is provided with Ori gen's asterisks
and obeli; but, unfortunately, as in all other MSS. of this
class, these symbols have been very imperfectly reproduced,
so that we cannot depend absolutely on it to recover the text
as it was before Origen's additions and alterations. Twenty-
two leaves of this MS. are at Paris, where they have some-
times been named the Codex Colbertimis, and one more is at

St, Petersburg.

H. Codex Petropolitanus, at St. Petersburg, of the sixth cen-

tury contains part of the Book of Numbers.
                            ;

A I.  Bodleian MS. of the Psalms (including, like A, the can-

ticles), of the ninth century. It was wrongly included by Holmes

and Parsons among the cursive MSS., and numbered 13. In its

margin many readings are given from Aquila, Symmachus, and

Theodotion, and from the " fifth " and " seventh " versions {see

p. 64).

  A K. MS. at Leipzig, of the seventh century, containing frag-

ments of Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, and Judges,
            THE SEPTUAGiyr.  G3

L. The Vienna Genesis : a splendid MS. at Yienna, written in

silver letters upon purple vellum, and adorned with illustrations,

which, like those of D, recall the classical style of painting. It is

of the fifth or sixth century, and contains only the Book of

A Genesis.  fine photographic facsimile of the whole of this MS.

has just been published.

M. Codex Coislinianus, at Paris ; a handsome MS. of the seventh

century, containing the earlier books of the Old Testament, from

Genesis to 1 Kings 8. 40, though mutilated in places. This MS.

belongs to the same class as G, containing a Hexaplar text.

   X. Codex Basiliano-Vaticanus, at Eome and Venice ; written

in sloping uncials of the eighth or ninth century. It consists of

two volumes, both of which have, unfortunately, been much

mutilated. In their present condition, the first (at Eome) contains

from Lev. 13. 59 to the end of Chronicles (with some lacunas),

-- 2 Esdras {i.e. the canonical Ezra) 5. 10 Xeh. 7. 3, and Esther ; the

second (at Venice) begins with Job 30. 8, and contains the rest of

Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, "Wisdom, Ecclesiasti-

cus. Minor Prophets, Major Prophets, Tobit, Judith, and the

four books of the Maccabees. Until quite recently the two

volumes were regarded as different MSS., and the second had

assigned to it a distinct letter, V, and was entitled Codex Venetus.

In conjunction with B, this was used for the Roman edition of

the Septuagint, pubhshed in 1587, which has been the edition in

common use down to the present day. The person who examined

it for Holmes and Parsons omitted to tell the editors that it was

written in uncials, and it consequently appears in their list among
the cursives, with the number 23, while its first volume takes its
proper place among the uncials.

   0. Codex Dublinensis Rescriptus, at Trinity College, Dublin,
This is a palimpsest, like C, but consists of only eight leaves,

containing portions of Isaiah, written early in the sixth century.

Its special value is due to the fact that it Avas written in Egypt
and apparently provides us with information as to the text of the
edition by Hesychius, which circulated in that country.
6i OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

   P. Fragments of Psalms, at Emmanuel College, Cambridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;

originally reckoned by Holmes and Parsons among the cursives, as
Xo. 294, but subsequently placed among the uncials (No. IX.).

   Q. Codex Marchalianus, in the Vatican Library at Rome.
This is a most valuable copy of the Prophets, written in Egypt in
the sixth century, in a fine bold uncial hand. The editor of this
manuscript, Dr. Ceriani, has shown that the text, as originally
written, is that of Hesychius ; and its value is still further in-
creased by the fact that an almost contemporary hand has added
a great number of various readings in the margin from a copy
of the Hexaplar text. These marginal readings include the
additions made by Origen, generally accompanied by the proper
critical marks (the obelus or asterisk), together with readings from
Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion. Plate YI. gives a repre-
sentation of a page of this manuscript (the whole of which has
been published in a photographic facsimile) containing Ezek. 6.
12-17.* In the margin will be seen several asterisks, which are

repeated in the line itself at the point at w^hich the insertion

begins (f.^., lines 6, 10), and before the beginning of each line

of the passage affected, while the metobelus, indicating the close

of the inserted passage, is represented by a sort of semi-colon
(e.ff., lines 2, 7). In most cases the name of the version from
which the inserted passage was taken is indicated by an initial
in the margin, a standing for Aquila (e.g., line 1), for Theodotion
(lines 6, 11, 15, 17, 22), and o- or av for Symmachus. "Where
Hesychius has introduced words on his own account which were
not in the original Septuagint, the asterisk indicating such words
has been written by the original scribe, and has ample space
allowed it in the writing ; but the great majority of the critical
signs have been added by the reviser, and show that the insertion
had already been made by Origen in his Hexaplar text, which

  A * papyrus fragment of this same passage, also containing the Hexaplar

text and symbols, has lately been acquired in Egypt by Mr. B. P. Grenfell, and
is no-w in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. It was apparently -written about

the fourth century.
                                                                                                  A

PLATE VI.

:v

    CXlXD-irTlPTOKl t YTTt t YNTIUHI
                    .UK DY-vcJ^lTh·{TlfT^^pc«v

                                                                                                                                                     (i,r

    veil Liixti pj.Mpci<:f tuL»lIttIlIllOlll'tUiA'

    nxOn-k'iHYN'ieAtcf i^trnilfl4^YllHltoY.

             run 11 VI svtiicinrjLriKAHVrico

    nxi ll tl Lll Isl t-O t J-L^Vl 8T1               llCtAt

    Al'A^ iWl n r/;HA(.l UJOVEMTt'l »(Yt rit

    u M n n nil N ci'e J 1
               « m'i Ll o y ri ytoyj ·

    in U U J>»-H C 1
               1 1 t'l t f> I t 1^4^11 \l J 6N{i

    "jfe ^iflliNTj"! { {-Vl 1 1 C I NTo'l C rv'K Ali )t ev-

    Y Vi" H rri C KY IXT
                        Y KAL K 1 t { I        L> C 6 Yf M."

               t'l*

    T*W H ri t  U^t I AJL4'i1l t-i^i aa2>Jl Ka I
    xiin-

    r^M \- l/V)J.tl I C 110 e,{ t \-\'i\ t  £ 1 1 MTe'ltlTY

    U H k: f li'f 14-Y 6ViixuK c %K\X e i rm.r.

\   I>^IT ro t-TJi AJLl J^ltTU I. OA iXULl \T\k

    ^ ) n ALl } JLYI-liZVl 1/
                        1^1 ·· {>'L1 TJLl 1        A·

                                                  J f li:

   .yn {YMi-^|U «<" iYJLJL|t«dCLl.trHrFM':

    ^ ^J "LU c ji^ P t rbniiiPTiyt I y. v^tii^Ja va
    u « m \i'iAd»m-itf"Aiiiot-i.k:i!t)i-Hpirriiirjvr
    fH 'i'-vr iiTi 111  1 1) ixLt ( iicii-f J        c

    NTl · Cll 1 1 1.1I^\ 1 't A-fY { ·  1 tTl'l t f'KSLllou.

    ^1 n HT 1  rji^^u » t TTi t « k: Y xTAtf^^ hj. ^
    (^^                                     >
                                               y  ,                                                  ·
      vi7E^^»^c«Ai'Aiitr'--

    -- Codex Marchalianus 6tii Cent.

           (Original size, 11^ iw. x 7 i».)
             THE SEPTUAGINT.                                 65

Hesychiiis often followed. The small writing in the margin con-

sists of notes added in the thirteenth century, of no textual

importance.

E,. Verona Psalter, containing both Greek and Latin versions

of the Psalms, written in the sixth century. Several canticles are

added, as in A, and the 151st Psalm has been supplied by a later

hand. The Greek is written in Latin letters.

T. Zurich Psalter, in its original state a splendid manuscript,

written in silver letters with gold initials upon purple vellum.

Several leaves are now missing. The canticles are included.

Written in the seventh century, and often agrees with the readings

A of in doubtful passages.

   U. Papyrus Psalter, in the British Museum ; thirty-two leaves

-- -- of papyrus, containing Ps. 11. 2 19. 6 ; 21. 14 35. 6, written in a

sloping hand, probably of the seventh century. Its readings are

often unique, and sometimes agree with the Hebrew against all

other MSS. of the Septuagint.

V. Codex Venetus, in the library of St. Mark's at Venice ; see

N, above.

   W. Fragments of Psalms, at Paris, of the ninth century. In-

cluded by Holmes and Parsons among the cursives, as No. 43.

A X.     MS. in the Yatican at Rome, containing most of Job,

of the ninth century. Included by Holmes and Parsons among

the cursives, as No. 258.

Y. Codex Taurinensis, at Turin, of the ninth century, contain-

ing the Minor Prophets.

   Z% Z^, Z**, Z*^, Z®, are small fragments of various books, of slight

importance.

   r {Gamma, the third letter of the Greek alphabet, those of the

Latin alphabet being now exhausted). Codex Cryptoferratensis,

at Grotta FeiTata, in Italy ; a ]7alim2:)sesf, containing the Prophets,

written in the eighth or ninth century. Much of the original

writing has been hopelessly obliterated. It is remarkable that

most of the Greek manuscripts in the monastery of Grotta Ferrata

are palimpsests, showing how scarce vellum was there, and how

S 2764.                                       E
66 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

the literary activity of the monks caused tlieni to use the same

sheets twice over, and sometimes even thrice.          Fragments

  A {Delta, the fourth letter of the Greek alphabet).

of Bel and the Dragon, according to the version of Theodotion,

written in the fifth century, if not earlier ; in the Bodleian Library

at Oxford.

  n {Pi, the sixteenth letter of the Greek alphabet). Fragments

of the 4th Maccabees, of the ninth century, at St. Petersburg.

Other fragments, and perhaps even larger MSS., will no doubt

come to light from time to time ; indeed, the British Museum has

recently acquired some leaves of a Psalter, written in a very rough

hand of Egyptian type, and perhaps of the seventh or eighth cen-

tury, which has not yet appeared in any published list. But the

catalogue here given shows the material now available to the

student of the Septuagint in the shape of uncial manuscripts. The

most important of them are, no doubt, B, A, and (where it is

G available) ^*, and, in their own special departments, and Q.

The cursive manuscripts of the Septuagint are far too numerous

to be described in detail. In the great edition of Holmes and

          Parsons no less than 308 * such manuscripts are

^MSs!^^^  described, and their various readings quoted. It

          may be of some interest, however, as showing the

amount of evidence available for each part of the Old Testament

to indicate which manuscri23ts contain, in full or in part, each of

the chief groups of books. The following 63 MSS. contain the

Pentateuch, or part of it ; Nos. 14-20, 25, 28-32, 37, 38, 44-47,

52-59, 61, 64, 68, 71-79, 82-85, 105-108, 118, 120-122, 125-136.

Fifty-five contain the historical books ; 15, 16, 18, 19, 29, 30,44,

52-59, 63, 64, 68, 70-72, 74-77, 82, 84, 85, 92, 93, 98, 106-108,

118-121, 123, 128, 131, 134, 144, 158, 209, 236, 237, 241-249,

besides one (No. 62) which contains only the Books of Maccabees.

The Psalms are preserved in no less than 128 copies, viz.: 13, 21,

27, 39, 43, 55, 65-67, 69, 70, 80, 81, 99-102, 104, 106, 111-115,

   * Nominally 313, but five of them (13, 23, 43, 258, 294) are really uncial
MSS., as has been mentioned above.
            THE SEPTUAGINT.  67

140-146, 150-152, 154, 156, 162-197, 199-206, 208, 210-219,

222, 223, 225-227, 262-294. The Prophets appear, more or less

perfectly, in 62 manuscripts, viz.: 22-24, 26, 33-36, 40-42, 45,

48, 49, 51, 61, 62, 68, 70, 86-88, 90, 91, 93, 95-97 104-106, 109,

114, 130, 132, 144, 147-149, 153, 185, 198, 228-233, 238-240,

301-311. Finally there are 39 manuscripts containing the books

of the Hagiographa ; 55, 68, 70, 103, 106, 109, 110, 137-139, 147,

149, 155, 157, 159-161, 248-261, 295-300, 307% 308». It is not
to be supposed that this exhausts the entire stock of cursives now

known to exist ; but it is probably sufficient for all practical pur-

poses. The value of the cursives only appears when they can be

divided into groups, showing common descent from one or other of

the ancient editions of the Septuagint which have been described

How above.  far this is at present feasible will be shown presently.

Such are the manuscripts on which scholars must depend for

recovering the genuine text of the Greek Old Testament. It will

            be useful to describe briefly what has been done

            in this direction, as showing the kind and the

amount of labour which scholars have bestowed on the task of

making the text of the Bible as accurate as possible in every

point. The first printed edition of the Septuagint was made by

the Spaniard, Cardinal Ximenes, who combined the Hebrew, Greek,

and Latin versions of the Bible in the four volumes known as the

Complutensian Polyglott (1514-1517). His Greek text was mainly

based on two late MSS. in the Vatican, now known as 108 and 248.

In 1518 the great printer Aldus issued an edition based on MSS.

then at Venice. Bat the most important edition in early times

is the Roman, published under the patronage of Pope Sixtus in

1587. This edition, which rests mainly on the great Codex

Vaticanus (B), though with many errors and divergencies,* has

remained since then the standard text of the Septuagint. In

1707-1728 a very good edition of the Codex Alexandrinus (A),

A supplemented from other MSS. where is deficient, was published

  B * It has beeu estimated that the Eoman text differs from that of in over

4000 places.

                                                                          E2
                                                                                                 ;;

68 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

by the Anglo-Prussian scholar Grabe. But the greatest work on the
Septuagint which has yet appeared is that which E,. Holmes and

J. Parsons produced at Oxford in 1798-1827. In this colossal work

the Roman text of 1587 is reprinted without variation, but in the

critical notes are given the various readings of no less than 325

manuscripts. Unfortunately many of these MSS, were very im-

perfectly examined by the persons employed for the task by the

editors, so that much of the work will have to be done over again
but the edition of Holmes and Parsons remains the only one which

gives a general view of the manuscript evidence, and has been the
basis of all study of the Septuagint text since their day. Of later
editors it is only necessary to mention Tischendorf, Avho in 1850

issued a revision of the Roman text, with variants from ^, A, and
0, (seventh edition in 1887, by Dr. Nestle) ; Field, who edited
the remains of the He:S5apla in 1875 ; Lagarde, who in 1883 pub-
lished an attempt to recover the edition of Lucian, besides many

other valuable contributions to the criticism of the Septuagint

and Dr. Swete, of Cambridge, who has just completed (1887-1894)

an edition giving the text of the Septuagint according to the best

K MS. extant in each part (B, wherever it is available, elsewhere

or A), with all the variants in three or four of the next best

manuscripts. This is likely to remain the standard edition of the

Septuagint for the use of scholars, until it is superseded by the

larger Cambridge edition now in preparation, which will contain
the same text with a very much larger apparatus of various read-
ings, gathered from a selected number of MSS. representing all

the different types of text.

The work, indeed, which remains to be done in connection with

the text of the Septuagint is still very considerable. One would

H,,ow  ^            wish,                  first  of  all,         to disen°ga^ge  the editions  of
       to                               '                       '
           recover

the original        Eusebius, Lucian, and Hesychius, and thereby to

       text         see what was the state of the Septuagint text

at the end of the third century. Then we want to go further

back, and discover, if possible, what the original text was like

when it left the hands of the translators themselves. And when
                    THE SEPTUAGINT.                        CO

that is done we still have to ask the question which is the ultimate

-- cause of all our interest in the Septuagint What does this original

text tell us as to the character of the Hebrew text from which it

was taken ?

For the first part of this inquiry scholai-s have already collected

considerable materials. The manuscripts of the Septuagint, when

,,  ^ ^.        closely examined, are found to fall into certain
Reconstruction  ·'

    of the three groups which point to several different centres of

                origin ; and, chiefly by the evidence afforded by

quotations in the writings of the early Fathers whose places of

residence we know, it is possible to localise these centres, and

thereby to say that one group represents the Antiochian edition of

Lucian, and another the Alexandrian edition of Hesychius.

The most recognisable of the three editions is that of Eusebius

and Pamphilus, which in fact reproduced the text fixed by Origen.

                For this the leading authorities are the Syriac

                translation by Bishop Paulus of Telia, which con-

tains the Prophets and Hagiographa, with Origen's apparatus

of asterisks and obeli ; the Codex Sarravianus (G), containing the

Pentateuch, with parts of Joshua and Judges ; the Codex Cois-

linianus (M), containing the same books, together with those of

Samuel and Kings ; the cui-sive MSS. known as 86 and 88,

containing the Prophets ; and the copious marginal notes in

the Codex Marchalianus (Q), which give Hexaplar readings with
an indication of the author (Aquila, Symmachus, or Theodotion)

from whom they were taken. Lagarde also refers to a manuscript

in private hands, which certainly contains this edition, but it has

not yet been identified or published.

Of the other two editions, the most recognisable is that of

Lucian. Certain direct references to it in early writers, and the

    2. Lucian.  statement that it was the standard text in Antioch
                and Constantinople, have enabled modern editors

to recognize it in certain extant manuscripts, and in the copious

Biblical quotations of Chrysostom and Theodoret. The fii'st sug-

gestion to this effect seems to have been made by Dr. Ceriani, of
70 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

Milan, and it was simultaneously worked out by Field, in the
Prolegomena to his Hexapla, and by Lagarde, who produced a text
of half the Old Testament (Genesis-Esther) according to this
edition, the completion of it being prevented by his lamented

death. No uncial MS. contains a Lucianic text, with the exception

of the Codex Venetus (V, or N). In the books Genesis-Judges it
appears in the cursives 19, 108, 118 ; in the historical books, 19,
82, 93, 108, 118 ; in the Prophets, 22, 36, 48, 51, 93, 144, 231, 308.

A The text of the Hagiographa has not yet been investigated.

Lucianic text also appears in the Gothic and old Slavonic versions,

-- and in the first printed edition of the Septuagint the Complu-

tensian, which was mainly taken from the MS. known as 108.
   The edition of Hesychius remains, and the identification of this

is still involved in some uncertainty. As the edition which circu-
                         lated in Egypt, it seems likely that it would be
                       found in MSS. written in that country, in the

Coptic versions, which were made from the Septuagint for the use
of the native Egyptians, and in the writings of the Alexandrian
Fathers, such as Cyril. Good authorities differ, however, as to the
Greek manuscripts in which this edition is to be looked for.
Ceriani assigns to it the Codex Alexandrinus (A), the original text
of the Codex Marchalianus(Q), the Dublin fragments of Isaiah (0),
and the cursives 26, 106, 198, 306 (all of the Prophets). The
able German professor, Cornill, however, also dealing with MSS.

containing the Prophets, finds the Hesychian version in 49, 68, 87,
90, 91, 228, 238, with the Coptic, Ethiopic, Arabic, and Old Latin
versions. These are akin to the above-mentioned group repre-
sented by A, 26, etc., but have (in his opinion) more of the
appearance of an authorised edition, in which marked peculiarities

of text, such as there are in A, are not to be expected. The
question cannot be solved without further investigation, to which
it may be hoped that the forthcoming large Cambridge edition
wiU considerably contribute.

   It will be observed that only a comparatively small number of
manuscripts can be definitely assigned to one or other of the
                                                                                                ;

                THE SEFTUAGINT.                                                                 71

ancient editions. The rest are, for tiie most part, later copies con-

                tainino*;  mixed  and  corrupt         texts,                  which  will  be  of
                                                    ^                       '
  Texts of the
great uncials,  little use towards the recovery of the original form

                of the Septuagint. There remain, however, some

of the early uncial manuscripts, including the oldest of all, the

great Codex Vaticanus (B). Cornill at one time suggested that B

was based on the edition of Eusebius, with the omission of all the

passages therein marked by asterisks as insertions from the Hebrew

but this view has been abandoned, and it is more probable (as stated

by Dr. Hort) that it is akin to the manuscripts which Origen used

as the foundation of his Hexapla. Origen would, no doubt, have

taken as his basis of operations the best copies of the Septuagint

B then available ; and if is found to contain a text like that used

by Origen, it is a strong testimony in its favour. Hence it is

commonly held to be, on the whole, the best and most neutral of

all the manuscripts of the Septuagint ; and it is a happy accident
that it has formed the foundation of the commonly received text,

that namely of the Roman edition of 1587. Between B and A the

differences of reading are sometimes very strongly marked, and the

divergencies have not yet by any means been explained. All con-

clusions are at present tentative and provisional, and the best

scholars are the least positive as to the certainty of their results.

Of the other great manuscripts, {»{ seems to contain a text inter-

mediate between A and B, though in the Book of Tobit it has a

form of the text completely different from both. Ceriani considers

that it shows some traces of Hesychian influence. He makes the

same claim for C ; but of this the fragments are so scanty that it

is difficult to anive at any positive conclusion.

   But although many points of detail still remain obscure, we

yet know quite enough about the Septuagint to be able to

,, state broadly the relation in which it stands to
Comparison of              ·'

Septuaerint with the Massoretic Hebrew text. And here it is

                that the great interest and importance of the

Septuagint becomes evident. Rightly or wrongly, it is certain that

the Septuagint differe from the Massoretic text to a very marked
72 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

extent. Words and phrases constantly differ ; details which
depend upon figures and numbers, such as the ages of the patri-

archs in the early chapters of Genesis, show great discrepancies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ;

whole verses, and even longer passages, appear in the one text and

not in the other ; the arrangement of the contents of several books

varies very largely. The discrepancies are least in the Pentateuch,

the words of which were no doubt held most sacred by all Jews,

and so would be less likely to suffer change either in the Hebrew

or in the Greek. But in the Books of Samuel and Kings, the

Septuagint departs frequently from the Massoretic text ; the

student of the Variorum Bible may be referred for examples to

1 Sam. 4. 1 ; 5. 6 ; 10. 1 ; 13. 1, 15 ; 14. 24, 41 ; 15. 13 ; 2 Sam.
4. 6-7 ; 11. 23 ; 17. 3 ; 20. 18, 19 ; 1 Kings 2. 29 ; 8. 1 ; 12. 2, 3,
4-24. In the narrative of David and Goliath the variations are

especially striking; for the best MSS. of the Septuagint omit

1 Sam. 17. 12-31, 41, 50, 55-58, together with 18. 1-5, 9-11,

17-19, and the rest of the references to Merab. In the Book of

Job there is good reason to believe that the original text of the

Septuagint omitted nearly one-sixth of the whole {see p. 76). In

Jeremiah the order of the prophecies differs greatly, chapters 46-51

being inserted (in a different order) after chapter 25. 14, while the

following passages are altogether omitted :  10. 6-8, 10 ;                      17. 1-4
                                                                                                                   ;

27. 1, 7, 13, and a great part of 17^22 ;  29.  16-20                           33. 14-26
                                                                             ;                                                 ;

39. 4-13. Even if we redpce the number of minor variations as

much as possible (and very paany of them may be due to mistakes

on the part of the Septuagint translators, to different methods of

supplying the vowels in the Hebrew text, to different divisions

of the words of the Hebrew, or to a freedom of translation which

amounts to paraphrase), yet these larger discrepancies, the list of

which the reader of the Yariorum Bible may easily increase for him-

self, are suificient to show that the Hebrew text which lay before

the authors of the Septuagint differed very considerably from

that which the Massoretes have handed down to us. What the

explanation of this difference may be, or which of the two texts

is generally to be preferred, are questions tp w)iigh it would be rash,
      THE EASTERN VERSIONS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 73

in the present state of our knowledge, to pretend to give a de-

cided answer. Some statement of the case is, however, necessary
for those who wish to understand what the evidence for our
present Old Testament text really is ; but it will be better to
postpone the discussion of it until we have completed the list of
the versions from which some light upon the question may be
expected. Some of them help us to reconstruct the text of the
Septuagint ; others tell us of the condition of the Hebrew text
at a later date than those at Avhich the Samaritan and the Greek
versions were made ; all in some degree help forward our main

-- purpose, the history of the Hebrew text of the Old Testament,

             -- § 3. Other Eastern Versions.
 -- The Syriac Version. The two versions of which we have

hitherto spoken, the Samaritan and the Greek, were made before

the institution of Christianity. It is otherwise with all the
remaining versions of the Old Testament. Outside the Jewish

and Samaritan communities there was no desire to know the
Hebrew Scriptures until Christianity came, preaching the fulfil-
ment of those Scriptures and the extension of their promises to
all nations. As the Christian missionaries spread abroad from

Judaea into the surrounding countries, fulfilling their Master's

last command to preach the Gospel to every people, they necessarily
refen-ed much to the history of the nation among which He
wrought His ministry, and to the prophets who had prepared
His way before Him. Hence there arose a demand for transla-
tions of the Hebrew Scriptures into the languages of every country

in which Christianity was preached ; and the versions of which
Ave have now to speak were all the offspring of that demand.
The first of these in geographical nearness to Judaea was the
Syriac. Syriac is the language of Syria and Mesopotamia, which
lie north and north-east of Palestine, and, with some slight differ-
ences of dialect, it was the actual language commonly spoken in
Palestine (and there known as Aramaic) at the time of our Lord's

life on earth. In the case of the New Testament, as we shall see,
74 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

several translations into Syriac were made ; but of the Old Testa-
ment there was (apart from the version of Origen's Hexaplar text,

mentioned above, p. 55, and some other late translations from

the · Septuagint, of which only fragments remain) only one, and

that the one which, in both Old and Xew Testament, is and

always has been the standard version of all the Syriac Churches.

It is known as the Peshitto, or " Simple" vetsion, but the exact

explanation of the name is unknown. It was probably made in

the second or third century after Christ ; certainly not later, since

in the fourth century we find it quoted and referred to as an

A authority of long standing.  considerable number of copies

of it are known, most of them forming part of a splendid

collection of Syriac manuscripts which were secured for the

British Museum in 1842 from the monastery of St. Mary Deipara,

situated in the Nitrian desert in Egypt. Among these is the

manuscript of which a part is reproduced in Plate VIL, which has

the distinction of being the oldest copy of the Bible in any

language of which the exact date is known. It was written in the

year 464, and contains the Books of Genesis, Exodus, Numbers,

and Deuteronomy; the part here reproduced being Exod. 13.8-17.

We thus have direct evidence of the text of this version in the

fifth century, and in the century before that we find copious

quotations from it in the writings of two Syrian Fathers, Ephrem

and Aphraates.

The Peshitto version omits the books of the Apocrypha, and

hence was evidently taken from Hebrew MSS. after the Canon of

the Hebrew Scriptures had been finally fixed. It also was origi-

nally without the Chronicles, which were added to it (from a

Jewish Targum) at a later time. The cause of the omission is not

known, and it may have been due simjily to a behef that the

Jewish history was sufficiently represented by the Books of Kings.

The whole translation is from the Hebrew, but the translators have

been rather free in their renderings, and seem also to have been

acquainted with the Septuagint. The books of the Apocrypha

(except 1 Esdras and perhaps Tobit) were added at an early date,
PLATE VII.

                         -- Pesiiitto Syriac MS. A.r. 464,

                       {Original size of page, lOf in. x Si in. ; of part reproduced, 61 in. x 6* in.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;;

      THE EASTEEN VEESIOXS OF THE OLD TESTAMEST. 75

and tliey now appear in all the earlier Syiiac MSS, which make
any pretence to contain a complete Old Testament. The Sjriac
version of these books is often useful in correcting errors which
have found their way into the Greek text.* At a later date the
whole version was revised by comparison with the Septuagint
and hence it is not very trustworthy as evidence for the Hebrew
text, and its agreements with the Septuagint cannot be taken

with any certainty as independent confirmations of its reading.

   The Coptic Versions {see Plates XVI. & XVII.).--Coptic is the

language which was used by the natives of Egypt at the time when

the Bible was first translated for their use. It is, indeed, a modified
form of the language which had been spoken in the country from ^^
time immemorial ; but about the end of the first century after Clirist
it began, owing to the influence of the great number of Greeks
settled in Egypt, to be written in Greek characters, with six ad-
ditional letters, and with a considerable admixture of Greek words.

It is to this form of the language that the name of Coptic was
given, and it continues to the present day to be used in the services c-
of the Christian Church in Egypt. There were, however, differ-
ences in the dialects spoken in different parts of the country, and
conseqneutly more than one translation of the Scriptures was
required. The number of these dialects is stiU a matter of un-
certainty, for the papyri discovered in Egypt of late years have
been, and still are, adding considerably to our knowledge of them

but it appears that four or five different versions of the New

Testament have been identified, and three of the Old. Only one
of these, however, has survived complete, though there are very
considerable fragments of another.

   The Coptic versions of the Bible are more important for the

New Testament than for the Old, and it will consequently be

convenient to treat of them at greater length in the chapter dealing

with the versions of the New Testament. In the Old Testament

   * Especially in the Book of Ecclesiasticus, in which the Syriac version must
have been made from the Hebrew original, now lost ; see the Variorum
Apocrypha and the editor's preface.
76  OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

 -) they were made from the Septuagint, and consequently tlieir
     evidence is mainly vahiable for the purpose of restoring the Greek
    text, and only indirectly for the Hebrew text which lies behind the
     Greek. For the student of the Septuagint, however, they should
    be of considerable service. As it is probable that they were taken
     from the edition of the Septuagint current in Egypt, which was

     that of Hesychius, they should give valuable assistance in identi-

    fying and recovering the text of that edition. The two most

     important of the Coptic versions are {a) the Memphitic or Bohairic
    Version^ current in Lower or Xorthern Egypt, and {h) the
    Thehaic or SaliitUc Version, current in Upper or Southern Egypt.
    Of these the Bohairic alone is complete, having been ultimately
    adopted as the standard Bible for all Egypt ; but the Sahidic

    exists in very considerable fragments. One portion of the Sahidic
     version is of especial interest ; for Avithin the last few years copies
    of the Book of Job in this version have been discovered con-

P taining a text which bears every mark of being its original form.

     It is shorter than the received text by about one-sixth, omitting
) in all about 376 verses, but the passages which disappear are in

    many cases inconsistent with the general argument of the book,
    and appear to have been inserted by Jewish scholars who did not
    understand, or did not approve of, the plan of the poem as it was

     originally written. Indeed the whole Sahidic Old Testament
     seems to have been at first free from Hexaplar additions, but to
    have been subsequently revised from MSS. containing these addi-
     tions, presumably copies of the Hesychian text which was current
    in Egypt. Both versions appear to have been made in the third

7 century, if not earlier, the Bohairic being probably the first in
     order of time. Of the third version, (c) the Middle Egijjytian, only

     a few fragments have as yet been discovered.

    -- The EtMopic Version. With the versions of Egypt may natu-

     rally go the version of Ethiopia ; but it will require only a brief
    notice. The Ethiopian manuscripts (most of which were acquired

    by the British Museum at the time of the Abyssinian war in 1867)

     are of very late date, but the original translation was probably
THE LATIN VERSIONS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 77

made in the fourth century after Christ. This version was, no

doubt, made from the Septuagint ; but it has been questioned
whether the extant MSS. really represent this translation, or a

much later one, made in the fourteenth century from the Arabic

or Coptic. The fact is that at present little can be said to be

known about the version at all. Both Old and New Testament

are preserved to us entire, though in very late manuscripts, but

they have never been properly edited.

The remaining Oriental versions may be dismissed in a few

A words.  few fragments remain of the Gothic version, made

for the Goths in the fourth century by their bishop, Ulfilas,

while they were still settled in Moesia, the modern Servia and

Bulgaria. Its chief interest lies in the fact that it was taken from

a copy of the Lucianic edition of the Septuagint.

   The Armenian, Arabic, Georgian, and Slavonic versions were

all made from the Septuagint, but they appear to be of little

critical value.

                 -- § 4. The Latin Versions.

-- {a) The Old Latin Version. When Christianity reached Rome,

the Church which was founded there was at first more Greek

than Latin. St. Paul wrote to it in Greek, the names of most
of its members, so far as we know them, are Greek, and its

earliest bishops were Greek : one of them, Clement, wrote an

epistle to the Corinthians in Greek which is found along with

the books of the New Testament in one of the earliest Greek

Bibles, the Codex Alexandrinus. There was therefore at first no

necessity for a Latin version of the Scriptures ; and the necessity,

when it arose, was felt less in Rome itself than in the Roman

province of Africa. It is in this province, consisting of the

habitable part of northern Africa, lying along the southern coast of

the Mediterranean, that a Latin Bible first makes its appearance.
   The importance of the Old Latin version, as it is called, to

distinguish it from the later version of St. Jerome, is much
greater in the New Testament than in the Old. In the former,
 78 OUIt BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

it is the earliest translation of the original Greek which we possess,
and is an important evidence for the state of the text in the
second century. In the latter it is only a version of a version,
being made from the Septuagint, not from the original Hebrew.
Historically, moreover, it is of less importance ; for it was almost
entirely superseded by the version of Jerome, and it exists to-day

only in fragments. Xo entire manuscript survives of the Old

Testament in this version ; a few books only, and those chiefly
of the Apocrypha, exist complete ; for the rest we are indebted
for most of our knowledge of this version to the quotations in
the early Latin Fathers.

    The Old Latin version of the ilfew Testament was extant in
Africa in the second century after Christ, and it is probable that
the translation of the Old Testament was made at the same time,
since it is almost certain that a complete Latin Bible was known
to Tertullian (about a.D. 200). Whether the first translation
was actually made in Africa, it is impossible to say, for want of
positive evidence ; but this view is commonly held and is at least
probable. What is certain is that the version exists in two
different forms, probably representing two independent transla-
tions, known, from the regions in which they circulated, as the
African and the European ; and that a revised form of the latter
was current in Italy towards the end of the fourth century, and
was known as the Italic. The original translation was rough and
somewhat free ; in the Itahc edition the roughnesses are toned
down and the translation revised with reference to the Greek.
As the translation was originally made before the time of the
various editions of Origen, Lucian, and Hesychius,j^its evidence,
wherever we possess it, is useful as a means to the recovery
of the earlier form of the Septuagint; and it is observable that
its text is akin to that which appears in the Codex Alexandrinus,
which seems to indicate an Egyptian origin. Unfortunately it
is available only to a limited extent. The apocryphal books of
Esdras, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, and Maccabees, together
with the additions to Daniel and Esther, were not translated or
THE LATIN VERSIONS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 79

revised by Jerome, and consequently the Old Latin versions of
these books were incorporated in the later Latin Bible and remain
there to this day.* The Psalter survives in a very slightly altered
form ; and Job and Esther are preserved in some ancient manu-
scripts. With these exceptions, the books of the Old Testament
are known to us only in the scanty fragments of three manuscripta
and the quotations of the Fathers ; and though the latter are
copious, they are an uncertain and insufficient basis for general

criticism.

 -- ip) The Vulgate. It is very different when we come to the

great work of St. Jerome, which, in the main, continues to be

the Bible of the Eoman Church to this day. Its origin is known

to us from the letters and prefaces of its author ; its evidence

is preserved to us in hundreds and even thousands of manuscripts

of all ages from the fourth century to the fifteenth. Its historical

importance is enormous, especially for the Churches of Western

Europe ; for, as we shall see in the progress of our story, it was

the Bible of these Churches, including our own Church of England,

We until the time of the Reformation.   shall have to trace its

history in the later chapters of this book ; for the present we are

concerned with the story of its birth.

By the end of the fourth century the imperfections of the

Old Latin version had become evident to the leaders of the

Roman Church. Not only was the translation taken from the

Greek of the Septuagint, instead of the original Hebrew, but the

current copies of it were grossly disfigured by corruptions. The

inevitable mistakes of copyists, the omissions and interpolations

of accident or design, the freedom with which early translators

handled the text of their original, the alterations of revisers, and

the different origin of the African and European forms of the

version, all contributed to produce a state of confusion and

   * The Old Latin version of Ecclesiasticus enables us to correct a disarrange-
ment which has taken place in the text of the Septuagint. In the Greek version,

-- chap. 30. 2.5 33. 13a is placed after chap. 36. 16a, which is plainly -wrong.

The Latin version has preserved the true order, -which has been followed in our

Authorised Version.
80 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRTPTS.

distortion intolerable to an educated Churchman. Hence about

the year 382 Pope Damasus appealed to the most capable Biblical

scholar then living, Eusebius Hieronymus, whom we know better

           under the abbreviated form of his name, Jerome,

           to undertake a revision of the Latin Bible.

Jerome was born in 346, a native of Stridon in Pannonia,

not far from the modern Trieste. Throughout his life he was

devoted to Biblical studies. In 374 he set himself to learn

Hebrew, then a very rare accomplishment in the West, taking

as his teacher a converted Jew. His first Biblical undertaking,
however, was not connected with his Hebrew studies. The

existing Latin Bible was a translation from the Greek throughout,

in the Old Testament as well as in the New, and all that Pope
Damasus now invited Jerome to do was to revise this translation

                     with reference to the Greek. He began with the

   of\hrGolp*eK Gospels, of which we shall have to speak later ;
                        but about the same time he also made his first

revision of the Psalter. He produced eventually no less than

three versions of the Psalms, all of which are still extant. The

first was this very slight revision of the Old Latin version, with

reference to the Septuagint, and is known as the Rommi Psalter ;

it was officially adopted by Pope Damasus, and still remains in
use in the cathedral of St. Peter at Rome. The second, made

           between 387 and 390, was a more thorough

^salters^  revision, still with reference to the Septuagint;
           but Jerome attempted to bring it into closer

conformity with the Hebrew by using Origen's Hexaplar text and

reproducing his asterisks and obeli ; this version was first adopted
in Gaul, whence it is known as the GaUican Psalter, and it has

held its place as the Psalter in general use in the Roman Church
and in the Roman Bible from that day to this, in spite of the

superior accuracy of the third version which Jerome subsequently

published. This is known as the Hebrew Psalter, being an

entirely fresh translation from the original Hebrew. It is found

in a fair number of manuscripts of the Vulgate, often in parallel
THE LATIN VERSIONS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 81

columns with the Gallicau version, but it never attained to general

usage or popularity.

   About the time when Jerome produced his Galilean Psalter, he

also revised some of the other books of the Old Testament, such as

                      Job (which alone now survives in this form), with

Testament.   reference to the Hexaplar test ; but it would
             a])pear that this undertaking was not carried to

completion. It is probable that Jerome, as his knowledge of

Hebrew increased, grew dissatisfied with the task of merely revis-

ing the Old Latin translation with reference to a text which itself

was only a translation. He had completed the revision of the NeW

Testament on these lines ; but with the Old Testament he resolved
to take in hand an altogether new translation from the Hebrew.

He appears to have felt no doubt as to the superiority of the

Hebrew text over the Greek, and in all cases of divergence

regarded the Hebrew as alone correct. This great work occupied

him from about the year 390 to 404 ; and separate books or
groups of books were published as they were completed. The first

to appear were the Books of Samuel and Kings, next the Prophets,

and lastly the Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and Esther.

In the prefatory letters prefixed to these books, Jerome tells us

much of his work and its reception. In spite of much individual

             support which he received, the general attitude

hirversron.  to\\'ards it was one of great hostility. The

             sweeping nature of the changes introduced, the

marked difference in the text translated, alienated those who had

been brought up to know and to love the old version, and who

could not understand the critical reasons for the alteration.

Jerome felt this opposition keenly, and raged against what he

regarded as its unreasonableness ; and his sensitiveness, not to say

We irritability, finds vigorous expression in his prefaces.   who

have seen the introduction of a Revised Bible in our own country,

intended to supersede the version to which England has been

devotedly attached for centuries, can understand the difficulties

which surrounded the work of Jerome. Gradually, as we shall see

S 2764.      F
                                                                  ;

82 OUR BIBLE ANB THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

in a later chapter, the superior accuracy and scholarship of his

version gave it the victory, though not in a perfect or complete

form. The Galilean Psalter continued to hold its own, and was

never replaced by the version from the Hebrew. The apocryphal

books he wished to reject entirely, because they found no place in

the current Hebrew Bible. He did indeed consent reluctantly to

make a very hurried translation of the Books of Judith and Tobit

but the remaining books he left untouched. In spite of this, they

continued to find a place in the Latin Bible ; and the Vulgate, as

finally adopted by the Eoman Church, contains these books in the

form in which they had stood, before the days of Jerome, in the

Old Latin version. In the rest of the Old Testament, Jerome's

version ultimately superseded the Old Latin, and in the New

Testament his revision of the Old Latin held its ground. To this

composite Bible, consisting partly of unrevised translations from

the Greek, partly of revised translations from the same, and partly

of translations from the Hebrew, was given in later days, when it

had been generally accepted in Western Europe, the name of the

"Vulgate," or commonly received translation ; and of this, the Bible
of our own country until the Reformation, and of the Roman

Church until to-day, we shall have much to say hereafter as we

We trace its history through the centuries.  shall also reserve for

later chapters an account of the chief manuscripts in which it is

now preserved. In the present chapter we have to do with it only

as it affords evidence which may help us to recover the original

Hebrew text of the Old Testament.

In this respect its importance is not to be tompared with that of

the Septuagint. The Hebrew text accessible to Jerome was practi-

cally identical with that which is accessible to

                            ourselves ; for although the Massoretes themselves

are later in date than Jerome by several centuries, yet, as we have

seen, the text which they stereotyped had come down practically

unchanged since the beginning of the second century after Christ.

Hence the version of Jerome is of little help to us in our attempt

to recover the Hebrew text as it existed in the centuries before the
                                      ;

CONDITION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT TEXT.  83

  Christian era ; on the other hand, if the Massoretic text is in itself
  superior to the Greek version as a whole, then the Vulgate is a
. more satisfactory national Bible than the Septuagint. The trans-
  lation itself is of unequal merit ; some parts are free to the verge
  of paraphrase, others are so literal as to be nearly unintelligible
  but on the whole the work is one of very great merit, and justifies
  the commanding position which Jerome holds among the Fathers

  of the Eoman Church. Jerome was, indeed, for the "West what

 -- Origen was for the East, the greatest Biblical scholar which the

  Church produced before the revival of learning at the end of the
  Middle Ages.

         -- § 5. Condition of the Old Testament Text.

     The Vulgate is the last of the versions of the Old Testament
 which need be mentioned here ; and now we come back to the
 question with which we ended the preceding chapter. What light,
  after all, do these versions throw on the text of the Old Testament ?
 Do they help us to get behind the Massoretic text, and see what
  the words of the Scriptures were when they were first written
 down ? And, if so, does this earlier evidence confirm the accuracy
 of the Massoretic text, or does it throw doubt upon it ? With the
 answer to this question we can close our examination of the Old

  Testament text.

    A diagram may serve to summarise, in broad outline, the infor-

 mation which has been given above.

^'^ _^^^^_^^^^^

400  SS^.

300

JOO           OMMtJi/i
300
too

     tr/lan.  S/ytiitu/i/u

                            F2
                                                                         ;

84 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

In the first place it will be clear that some of the versions we

have described must be excluded on the ground that they are not

,,Most.    ,,.,  ver-  translations of  the  Hebrew  at  all.  Thus the
         of the

sions too late to Coptic, Ethiopic, Gothic, Armenian, Arabic,

                       Georgian, Slavonic, and Old Latin versions were

made from the Greek of the Septuagint ; and they can only
indirectly help us to recover the original Hebrew. Their value is

that they help us to restore the original text of the Septuagint

and from the Septuagint we may get on to the Hebrew. In the

next place, the Peshitto Syriac and the Latin Vulgate, though

trtinslated from the Hebrew, were translated at a time when the

Hebrew text was practically fixed in the form in which we now

have it. The Peshitto was made in the second or third century,

the Vulgate at the end of the fourth ; but we have already seen

that we can trace back the Massoretic text to about the beginning

of the second century. In some cases, when the Hebrew has been
corrupted at a comparatively late date, these versions may show us

the mistake ; but their main value arises from the fact that, at the
time when they were made, the Hebrew vowel-points were not

yet written down, but were supplied in reading the Scriptures

according to the tradition current among the Jews. Hence the

Peshitto and the Vulgate show us in what way the absent vowels

were supplied at a date very much earlier than any of our existing

manuscripts. The same is the case with the Greek versions of

Aquila, Theodotion, and Symmachus. They were made from the

Hebrew, but from a Hebrew text too late to be of much service to

us in our present inquiry.

There remain the Samaritan and the Septuagint versions. Of

these the Samaritan is the oldest ; and as it is not really a trans-

  Envi-dJence ofi>tihve lation into a different lan"guag°e,' but a direct
  Samaritan Pen- descendant of the original Scriptures in the same

                       language and written in the same characters, its

evidence might be expected to be of exceptional value. Unfortu-

nately, however, it relates only to the Pentateuch ; and we have

seen (p. 72) that it is exactly here that help is least required, and
CONDITION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT TEXT.                           85

that tlie variations of the Samaritan text, even where they appear
to be right, are not of very great or striking importance. With
the Septuagint it is quite otherwise. It contains all the books of
the Old Testament, including those which the Jews finally refused

to accept as inspired ; and its variations are, in many of the books,
both numerous and important. The real question to be debated,

then,' is this : Does the Septuagint or the Massoretic text represent
most accurately the words and form of the Old Testament Scrip-
tures as they were originally written ?

    So far as the weight of authority goes, the preponderance is
decidedly in favour of the Hebrew. Origen and Jerome, the two

                                greatest Biblical scholars of antiquity, deliber-

    ^Ma^sOTetic!" ^^^^^ abandoned the original Septuagint and its
                       descendants, the translations made from it, in

order to produce versions which should correspond as nearly as
possible with the Hebrew. So, too, in the modern world, all the
translators of the Bible whose scholarship was equal to it went to

the Hebrew for their text of the Old Testament, while those who
could not read Hebrew fell back upon the Yulgate, which was
itself translated from the Hebrew. Our own Authorised and
Revised Bibles, as well as nearly all the translations which
preceded them, rest almost entirely upon the Massoretic text, and
only very rarely follow the versions in preference to it. And this
is very natural ; for the Old Testament books were written in
Hebrew, and it seems reasonable to suppose that they would be
best represented in the Hebrew manuscripts. In the case of no
other book in the world should we look to a translation rather

than to copies in the original language for the best representation
of the contents of the work. Since the last century, however,
there have been scholars who have maintained that the Septuagint

comes nearer to the original Hebrew than do the Hebrew manu-
scripts of the Massoretic family ; and this view has recently been
urged with much vigour and plausibility in an English journal.*

* By Sir Henry Howorth, M.P., F.E.S., in the Academy, 1893-4.
86 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

It would be absurd to attempt to decide the point authoritatively
in such a work as this ; but the conditions of the problem can be
stated, and the apparent course of the controversy indicated in

brief.

   In the first place it is only natural that the Hebrew test should

have suffered considerable corruption. If we take the year 100

                                      ^     after Christ as representinoj the date to which we

The Hel)rew text                            can trace b, ac^k  ,  .  c             ,  ^t
   sure to be cor-                                                                    Massoretic
        rupte                                                  the existence of  the

                                         ;  ^^^^^ there is still a gap of many centuries before

we reach the dates at which most of the books were composed.

Nearly a thousand years separate us from the earliest of the

Prophets, and even if we accept the latest date which modern

criticism assigns to the composition of the Pentateuch in its

present form, there are still more than five hundred years to be

accounted for. It would be contrary to reason to suppose that the

text had been handed down through all these centuries without

suffering damage from the errors of scribes or the alterations of

correctors, especially when we remember that in the course of that

period the whole style of writing had been changed by the intro-

duction of the square Hebrew characters, that the words were not

divided from one another, and that the vowels were not yet indi-

cated by any marks. It is thus natural in itself that the Hebrew
text as we have it now should need some correction. It is also
natural that the Septuagint version, which we can trace back to an

origin more than 350 years earlier than the Massoretic text, should
in some cases enable us to supply the needed correction. The
text of the Septuagint may itself have suffered much corruption
between the time of its composition and the time to which our

direct knowledge of it goes back ; but it is contrary to reason to

suppose that it has always been corrupted in those places where

the Hebrew has been corrupted, and that it does not sometimes
preserve the right reading where the Hebrew is wrong.

  A partial confirmation of this conclusion is provided by the

- Targums, the earliest portions of which go back a century or more

before the formation of the Massoretic text. In these there are
     CONDITION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT TEXT.                        87

indications that the text on which they were based, though very

and         ,.,  like the Massoretic text, was not identical with it.
                                                                                                              '
     certaanly

corrupt in       We can, however, go further, and show that there

some places.     m .

                 IS
                    much,  ,       numb^ er      p            ·  wh^ i·c^h

                 a         larger            or     passages

corruption has almost certainly taken place between the date at

which the Septuagint was written and that at which the Masso-

retic text was formed. It would need an entire treatise to do this

thoroughly, but the reader of the Variorum Bible will find a con-

siderable number of places noted in W'hich the reading of the

Septuagint makes better sense than that of the Hebrew. In not a

few passages the Hebrew gives no natural meaning at all ; for

instance, Ex. 14. 20 ; 1 Sam. 13. 21 ; 27. 10 (where even the

Authorised Version departs from the Massoretic text) ; much of
1 Kings 6 & 7 ; Job 3. 14 ; 35. 15, and many other passages

indicated in the Variorum Bible. In other places verses are sup-

plied by the Septuagint which are not in the Hebrew ; in these it

will be a matter for critics to decide in each case whether the

Hebrew has wTongly omitted words, or the Septuagint wrongly

inserted them, but it is not likely that the answer will always be

A the same.   list of some such passages has already been given on

p. 72. Again, take the larger variations there mentioned in the
Books of Jeremiah and Job. In the former the arrangement found

in the Septuagint is by many scholars considered preferable to

that of the Hebrew, and its text in many doubtful passages appears

to be superior. In Job the proof is even more complete ; for a

large number of passages in it, which had already been believed, on

the ground of their style, to be later additions to the Hebrew, have

recently been shown to have been absent from the original text

of the Septuagint, and to have been added by Origen in his

Hexapla, with the usual marks indicating that they had been

introduced by him from the Hebrew. Once more, in the Penta-

teuch we find the Septuagint and the Samaritan version often

agreeing in opposition to the Hebrew ; and since there is no

reasonable ground for asserting that either of these translations

was influenced by the other, we can only suppose that in such

passages they represent the original reading of the Hebrew, and
88 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIBTS.

that the Massoretic text is corrupt. To this it may be added that

the " Book of Jubilees," a Jewish work written not long before the

fall of Jerusalem (a.d. 70) and containing a modified version of

the story of Genesis, frequently supports the Septuagint and

Samaritan readings in preference to those of the Hebrew.

It seems, then, reasonable to conclude that in many cases the

Septuagint certainly contains a better text than the Hebrew ; and

B t th S t  ^^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^' '^^ '^^ likely that it is often right in

gint not always passages where we are not able to decide with

            certainty between alternative readings. Can we

go further and say that it is generaUy so, and that wherever the

two differ,- the presumption is in favour of the Septuagint ? Cer-

tainly not, without considerable qualifications. There can be no

doubt, first, that the Septuagint as originally written contained

many mistakes ; and, secondly, that the text of it has been much
corrupted in the course of ages. It must be remembered that

the Septuagint was translated from a Hebrew text in which the

words were not separated from one another and were unprovided

with vowel points. Hence some of the differences between the

Septuagint and the Hebrew do not imply a difference of reading

at all, but simply a difference in the division of the letters into

words or in the vowel points supplied. Sometimes the ore may

be right and sometimes the other ; but in any case the difference

is one of interpretation, not of text. Then, again, there can be

no doubt that the authors of the Septuagint made many actual

mistakes of translation. Hebrew, it must be remembered, was

not their habitual language of conversation ; it was a matter of

study, as old English is to scholars to-day, and it was quite

possible for them to mistake the meaning of a word, or to confuse

words which were written or spoken nearly alike. The possibility

of such mistakes must be borne in mind, and only a good Hebrew

scholar can warn us of them.*

It is a more difficult point to decide whether the authors of

   * Some interesting examples of errors caused by the Greek translator having
misunderstood the Hebrew, or having supplied the wrong vowel points, are
given in the preface to the Variorum Apocrypha.
CONDITION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT TEXT.    89

the Septuagint made deliberate additions to the text. Translators
held a different view of their rights and duties from that which

                        would be accepted to-day. They thought them-

Septuagint?  ^^^^'^^ ^*^ liberty to add explanatory words and
             phrases, to paraphrase instead of adhering closely

to their original, to supplement what they believed to be omissions
(often by incorporating words from other passages where the same

or similar events were recorded, as from Kings into Chronicles, and

vice versa), perhaps even to insert incidents which they believed

to be true and edifying. This would seem to be the case with

the additions to the Books of Daniel and Esther, which the Jews

refused to accept as part of the inspired Scriptures, and which

have been banished to the Apocrypha in the English Bible. In

smaller details, the authors of the Septuagint seem at times to

have softened down strong expressions of the Hebrew, no doubt

from a feeling that the more refined literary taste of Alexandria

would be offended by them.

As to the corruptions of the Septuagint text, the history of it

in the preceding pages explains these sufficiently. It is no easy

             task, in many places, to be sure what the true

SeptuaginTtext. reading of the Septuagint is. Some manuscripts

                          represent the text of Origen, in Avhich everything

has been brought into conformity with the Hebrew as it was in

his day ; many are more or less influenced by his text, or by the
versions of Aquila and Theodotion. Some represent the edition

of Lucian ; others that of Hesychius. Even those which belong

to none of these classes do not agree among themselves. The

A great manuscripts known as  and B frequently differ very

K markedly from one another, and sometimes stands quite apart

from both. It is clear that in many cases it is impossible to

correct the Hebrew from the Greek until we have first made

sure what the Greek reading really is.

One further possibility remains to be considered, that of de-

liberate falsification of either Greek or Hebrew for party purposes.

Such accusations were made, both by Christians and by Jews,
90 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

in the early centuries of the Church's history, when the Jewa

held to the Hebrew text as it was fixed about a.d. 100, and

                      the Christians to the Septuagint. They have

    falsification of  ^^en  renewed        from  time  to  time                           and, quite
                                                                                    ;
     Hebrew not
                      lately, Sir H. Howorth, in his contention for
          proven.                               *^

                      the superiority of the Septuagint, has declared

the Massoretic text to have been deliberately altered by the Jews

with an anti-Christian purpose. But the proof for so serious a

charge is wholly lacking. It is true that the Hebrew Bible as

we know it assumed its present form at a time when the anta-

gonism between Jew and Christian was strongly marked, and

probably under the direction of the Rabbi Akiba, the great leader

of the extreme party of the Jews at the end of the first century.

At such a time and under such a leader it might seem not

impossible that an attempt would be made to remove from the

Old Testament those passages and expressions to which the

Christians referred most triumphantly as prophecies of Christ.

The best answer to such a charge is that these passages have

not been removed, and that the differences between the Massoretic

text and the Septuagint are by no means of this character. Nothing

can have been gained, from the party point of view, by altering
the order of the prophecies of Jeremiah, or by expanding the Book
of Job. The Books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, which were

ejected from the Hebrew text and retained in the Greek, do not'

testify of Christ more than the undisputed books which remain in

both. The Christians had less reason to feel special interest in

the Books of the Maccabees than the patriotic Jews. Indeed, it is

untrue to say that the books of the Apocrypha were at this time

ejected from the Hebrew Bible ; the fact being that they had

never formed part of it, and were never quoted or used on the

same level as the books recognised as inspired. It is true that one

verse has dropped out of a long list of towns (after Josh. 16. 59),

in  which  was        contained  (as  the  Septuagint  shows                              see  Variorum
                                                                                       ;

footnote) the name of " Ephratah, which is Bethlehem," by the

help of which the reference to Ephratah in Psalm 132. 6 might be
CONDITION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT TEXT.                                                                              91

interpreted as a prophecy of  our  Lord's  birth  at  Bethlehem                                                   but
                                                                                                               ;

seeing that the same identification is repeated in four other places,

including the much more strongly Messianic passage in Micah

5. 2, the omission in Joshua alone would be perfectly useless for

party purposes, and may much more fairly be explained as an

accident. It is needless to add that the greater prophecies of the

Messiah, such as the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, stand quite

untouched in the Hebrew, and that the vast majority of the

differences between the Hebrew and the Greek throughout the

Old Testament could have no possible partisan motive whatever.

The authors of our Revised Version of the Old Testament,

while recognising the probable existence of earlier editions of the

                       Hebrew differing from the Massoretic text, yet

declare that "the state of knowledge on the

subject is not at present such as to justify any attempt at an

entire reconstruction of the text on the authority of the versions,"
and have consequently " thought it most prudent to adopt the

Massoretic Text as the basis of their work, and to depart from it,

as the Authorised Translators had done, only in exceptional cases."

There can be no doubt that they did rightly. The versions have

as yet been too insufficiently studied to justify a general use or a

rash reliance upon them. When the text of the Septuagint, in

particular, has been placed on a satisfactory footing (to which it is

to be hoped the forthcoming Cambridge edition will greatly con-

tribute) it will be time enough to consider how far its readings

may be taken in preference to those of the Hebrew. It is probable

that eventually a much fuller use will be made of the Septuagint

than has hitherto been the case, and those have done good work

who have called attention, even in exaggerated tones, to the claims

of the ancient Greek version ; but no general substitution of the
Greek for the Hebrew as the prime authority for the text of the

Old Testament will be possible unless the universal assent of

students be won to the change. It will not be enough for one

section of specialists to take up the cry, and, proclaiming them-

selves to be the only advanced and unprejudiced school, look down
92 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

upon all others as unenlightened laggards. Such schools and such
cries, stimulative as they are of thought and of work, are for the
moment only. If the Massoretic text is ever to be driven from the
assured position of supremacy which it has held since the days of
Origen and of Jerome, it will only be when the great bulk of sober
criticism and the general intelligence of Biblical students have
been convinced that the change is necessary. It is very doubtful
whether such a conviction will ever be reached ; and meanwhile

the plain student of the Bible may take comfort in the thought

that, however interesting in detail the variations between the

versions and the Hebrew may be, they touch none of the great
fundamental teachings of the Old Testament. The history of the

Chosen People remains the same ; the moral eloquence of prophet
and psalmist is unaltered ; and still the Old Testament Scriptures
testify of Christ, as they have always testified.
                                                                           ( 93 )

                                                                           CHAPTER VI.

THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

WHEN we pass from the Old Testament to the New, we pass

from obscurity into a region of comparative light. Light,

indeed, is plentiful on most of its history ; our danger is rather

lest we should be confused by a multiplicity of illumination from

different quarters, as the electric search-lights of a- fleet often

We bewilder those who use them.                                                    know, within narrow limits,

the dates at which the various books of the New Testament were

written ; we have a multitude of manuscripts, some of them

reaching back to within 250 years of the date of the composition

of the books                                                               we have evidence from versions and the early
                                                                        ;

Christian writers which carry us almost into the apostolic age

itself. "We shall find many more disputes as to minor points con-

cerning the text of the New Testament than we do in the Old,

just because the evidence is so plentiful and comes from so many

different quarters ; but we shall find fewer doubts affecting its

general integrity.

The books of the New Testament were written between the

years 50 and 100 after Christ. If anyone demurs to this lower

limit as being stated too dogmatically, we would only say that it is

                                                                           not laid down in ignorance that it has been con-

^MSS^^"*                                                                   tested, but in the belief that it has been contested
                                                                           without success. But this is not the place for a

discussion on the date of the Gospels or Epistles, and if anyone

prefers a later date, he only shortens the period that elapsed
between the composition of the books in question and the date at

which the earliest manuscripts now extant were written. The
originals of the several books have long ago disappeared. They
must have perished in the very infancy of the Church ; for no
94 OVR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

We allusion is ever made to them by any Christian writer.*  can

however, form some idea of what they must have looked like.

Each book, we must remember, was written separately, and there

can have been no idea at first of combining them into a single

collection corresponding in importance and sacredness to the Law,

the Prophets, and the Hagiographa. St. Luke merely wrote down,
as many had taken in hand to do before, a memoir of our Lord's

life ; St. Paul wrote letters to the congregation at Rome or at
Corinth, just as we write to our friends in Canada or India. The

material used was, no doubt, papyrus (see p. 21) ; for this was the

common material for writing, whether for literary or for private

purposes, though parchment was used at times, probably, as the

instructions of the Talmud at a later date imply, for more im-

portant documents, such as the sacred books of the Old Testament.

Thus, when St. Paul directs Timothy to bring with him " the

books, but especially the parchments," the latter may well have

been copies of parts of the Old Testament ; the rest must have

been works wiitten on papyrus, but of what nature we cannot tell.
His own letters would certainly have been written on papyrus

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ;

and the discoveries of the last fifty, and especially of the last five,

years have given us back not a few books and letters written on

this material by inhabitants of the neighbouring country of Egypt

at this very time. The elder of the church in Western Asia who

arose in his congregation to read the letter of St. Paul which we

know as the Epistle to the Ephesians, must have held in his hand

a roll of white or light yellow material about four feet in length and

some ten inches in height. The Acts of the Apostles might have

formed a portly roll of thirty feet, or might even have been divided

into two or more sections. Even had the idea been entertained of

making a collection of all the books which now form our New

Testament, it would have been quite impossible to have combined

them in a single volume, so long as papyrus was the material

employed.

A * verj rhetorical passage in Tertullian may be ignored.
THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.  95

   Bat in fact the formation of a single " New Testament " was

impossible, so long as no decision had been reached by the Church
                          to distinguish between the inspired and the un-

  ^SameSr inspired books. The four Gospels had indeed

    impossible at been marked off as a single authoritative group
                         early in the second century ; and the epistles of

St. Paul formed a group by themselves, easily recognisable and
generally accepted. But in the second and third and even in the
fom'th century the claims of such books as 2 and 3 John, 2 Peter,
Jude, and the Apocalypse were not admitted by all ; while other
early Christian writings, such as the Epistle of Clement, the epistle
which passed by the name of Barnabas, and the "Shepherd" of
Hermas, ranked almost, if not quite, on the same footing as the
canonical books, x4.ll this time it is highly improbable that the
sacred books were written otherwise than singly or in small groups.

Only when the minds of men were being led to mark off with some

unanimity the books held to be authoritative, are collected editions,

as we should now call them, likely to have been made. Only
gradually did men arrive at the conception of a Canon, or authori-
tative collection, of the New Testament which should rank beside
the Canon of the Old.

    "We need, then, feel no surprise either at the fact that all the
manuscripts of the first three centuries have (so far as we know)
perished, or at the great quantity of various readings which we
 find to have come into existence by the time our earliest extant
 manuscripts were written. The earliest Christians, a poor, scat-
 tered, often illiterate body, looking for the return of their Lord at

/ no distant date, were not likely either to care sedulously for minute

 accuracy of transcription, or to preserve their books religiously for ·
 the benefit of posterity. Salvation was not to be secured by exact-
 ness in copying the precise order of words ; it was the substance of
 the teaching that mattered, and the scribe might even incorporate
 into the narrative some incident which he believed to be equally
 authentic, and think no harm in so doing. So divergent readings
 would spring up, and different texts would become current in
96 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

different regions, each manuscript being a centre from which other

copies would be taken in its own neighbourhood. Persecution,

too, had a potent influence on the fortunes of the Bible text. On

the one hand, an edict such as that of Diocletian in 303, ordering

all the sacred books of the Christians to be burnt, would lead men

to distinguish between the sacred and non -sacred books, and so

assist the formation of an authoritative Canon. On the other

hand, numberless copies must have been destroyed by the Roman

officials during these times of persecution, the comparison of copies

with a view to removing their divergencies must have been

difficult, and the formation of large and carefully written manu-

scripts must have been discouraged.

The change comes with the acceptance of Christianity by the

Emperor Constantine in a.d. 324. Christianity ceased to be perse-

                     cuted and became the religion of the Empire,

of ^texts'^'l^'gins  ^^^  books needed no longer to be concealed                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;

in fourth cen- ^he contrary, a great demand for additional copies

                     must have been created to supply the new churches

and the new converts. The Emperor himself instructed Eusebius

of Caesarea, the great historian of the early Church, to provide

fifty copies of the Scriptures for the churches of Constantinople ;

and the other great towns of the Empire must have required many

more for their own wants. Here then, and possibly not before,
we may find the origin of the first collected New Testaments ; and

here we are already in touch with the earliest manuscripts which

have come down to us, from which point the chain of tradition is

complete as far as our own days.

   The oldest manuscripts of the Greek New Testament now in ex-
istence were written in the fourth century. Two splendid volumes,

                     one now in the Vatican Library at Rome, the other

  Transmission            r^  t»     ·  ii  n
from 4th to 15th
                     at St. Petersburg, are assigned by all competent
       century.
                     critics to this period. Two more were probably

written in the fifth century ; one of these is the glory of our own
British Museum, the other is in the National Library at Paris.

In addition to these there are perhaps tw-elve very fragmentary
          THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.     97

manuscripts of the same century which contain only some small /

portions of the Xew Testament. From the sixth century twenty- ^

seven documents have come down to us, but only five of these /
contain so much as a single book complete. From the seventh

                                                                                                                                                                ^

we have eight small fragments ; from the eighth six manuscripts s
of some importance and eight fragments.* So far the stream '
of tradition has run in a narrow bed. Time has, no doubt,
caused the destruction of many copies ; but it is also probable
that during these centuries not so many copies were made as
was the case subsequently. The style of writing then in use
for works of literature was slow and laborious. Each letter
was a capital, and had to be written separately ; and the copy-
ing of a manuscript must have been a long and toilsome task.
In the ninth century, however, a change was made of great
importance in the history of the Bible, and indeed of all ancient
Greek literature. In place of the large capitals hitherto employed,
a smaller style of letter came into use, modified in shape so as to
admit of being written continuously, without lifting the pen after
every letter. Writing became easier and quicker ; and to this fact
we may attribute the marked increase in the number of manu-
scripts of the Bible which have come down to us from the ninth
and tenth centuries. From this point numeration becomes useless.
Instead of counting our copies by units we number them by tens
and scores and hundreds, until by the time that printing was
invented the total mounts up to a mass of several thousands.
And these, it must be remembered, are but the remnant which
has escaped the ravages of time and survived to the present

day. When we remember that the great authors of Greek and

Latin literature are preserved to us in a mere handful of copies,

in some cases indeed only in one single manuscript, we may

   * It must be understood that the dates here given are not absolutely certain.
Early manuscripts on vellum are never dated, and their age can only be judged
from their handwriting. But the dates as here stated are those which have
been assigned by competent judges, and may be taken as approximately

correct.

S2764.                                    G
98 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

feel confident that in this great mass of Bible manuscripts we

have much security that the true text of the Bible has not been

lost on the way.

With the invention of printing in the fifteenth century a new

era opens in the history of the Greek text. The earliest printed

                     document (so far as Europe is concerned) was

pSSfteTtext*.        ^^s^^<^  i^  ^^^  y^^^  1^^^                      ^^^ ^^^® ^^^^ complete
                                                                    5

                     book produced by the printing press was, rightly

enough, the Bible, in 1456. This, however, was a Latin Bible
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ;

for Latin was, in the fifteenth century, the language of literature

in "Western Europe. Greek itself was little known at this date.

It was only gradually that the study of it spread from Italy

(especially after the arrival there of fugitives from the East, when

the Turkish capture of Constantinople overthrew the Greek

Empire) over the adjoining countries to the other nations of the

West. It was not until the sixteenth century had begun that

there was any demand for a printed Greek Bible ; and the honour
of leading the way belongs to Spain. In 1 502, Cardinal Ximenes

formed a scheme for a printed Bible containing the Hebrew,

Greek, and Latin texts in parallel columns. Many years were

spent in collecting and comparing manuscripts, with the assistance

of several scholars. It was not until 1514 that the New Testa-

ment was printed, and the Old Testament was only completed in

1517. Even then various delays occurred, including the death of

Ximenes himself, and the actual publication of this edition of the

Greek Bible (known as the Complutensian, from the Latin name

of Alcala, where it was printed) only took place in 1522 : and

by that time it had lost the honour of being the first Greek

Bible to be given to the world.

That distinction belongs to the New Testament of the great

Dutch scholar, Erasmus. He had been long making collections

_          G,,ree,k  for  an edition of      the Bible in              Latin, when in
Erasmus ,                                                                                      '

Testament, 1515 a j)roposal was made to him by a Swiss

          '          printer, named Froben, to prepare an edition in
.

Greek which should anticipate that which Ximenes had in hand.
                                                               ;

          THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.  99

Erasmus consented ; the work was rapidly executed and as rapidly
passed through the press ; and in 1516 the first printed copy of

the New Testament in the original Greek was given to the world.

The first edition was full of errors of the press, due to the failure

of a subordinate who had been entrusted with the duty of revising

the sheets ; but a second edition quickly folloAved, and a third,
and a fourth, each representing an advance in the direction of

a more accurate text. Erasmus' first edition was based on not

more than six manuscripts at the most, and of these only one

was either ancient or valuable, and none was complete, so that

some verses of the Apocalypse were actually re-translated by

Erasmus himself into Greek from the Latin ; and, what is more

remarkable, some words of this translation, which occur in no

Greek manuscript whatever, still hold their place in our received

Greek text. That text is, indeed, largely based on the edition of

Erasmus. The work of Ximenes was much more careful and

elaborate ; but it was contained in six large folio volumes, and only
600 copies were printed, so that it had a far smaller circulation

than that of Erasmus. The great printer-editor, Robert Estienne

or Stephanus, of Paris (sometimes anglicised as Stephens, without

ground), issued several editions of the Greek New Testament,

based mainly on Erasmus, but corrected from the Complutensian

and from fifteen manuscripts, most of them comparatively late

                   and of these editions the third, printed in 1550, is

^                  substantially the received text which has appeared
                   in all our ordinary copies of the Greek Bible in
       text?^^

England down to the present day. On the Continent the received

text has been that of the Elzevir edition of 1624, which differs very

slightly from that of Stephanus, being in fact a revision of the

latter with the assistance of the texts published in 1565-1611 by

the great French Protestant scholar Beza.

   Such is the history of our received text of the Greek New

Testament ; and it will be obvious from it how little likelihood

,^ - . .  .        there was that it would be a really accurate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ·'
Its deficiencies,
                   representation of the original language. For
                                                                          G2
100 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

fourteen hundred years the New Testament had been handed down

in manuscript, coi^y being taken from copy in a long succession

through the centuries, each copy multiplying and spreading errors

(slight, indeed, but not unimportant in the mass) after the manner

described in our first chapter. Yet when the great invention of

printing took place, and the words of the Bible could at last be

stereotyped, as it were, beyond the reach of human error, the first

printed test was made from a mere handful of manuscripts, and

those some of the latest and least trustworthy that existed. There

was no thought of searching out the oldest manuscripts and

trusting chiefly to them. The best manuscripts were still unknown

to scholars or inaccessible, and the editors had to content them-

selves with using such later copies as were within their reach,

generally those in their native town alone. Even these were not

always copied with such accuracy as we should now consider

necessary. The result is that the text accepted in the sixteenth

and seventeenth centuries, to which we have clung from a natural

reluctance to change the words which we have learnt as those of

the Word of God, is in truth full of inaccuracies, many of which

can, be corrected with absolute certainty from the vastly wider

information which is at our disposal to-day. The difference

between the Authorised Version and the Eevised Version shows

in great measure the difference between the text accepted at the

time of the first printed editions and that which commends itself

We to the best modern scholars.         do not find the fundamentals

of our faith altered, but we find many variations in words and
sentences, and are brought so much nearer to the true Word of

God, as it was written down in the first century by Evangelist

and Apostle.

What, then, are the means which we have for correcting the

"received text," and for recovering the original words of the

              New Testament ? This question will be answered

amending It.  ^^^^'^  ^'^^^1  i^  ^'^^  ^^^^  ^^^  chapters                                        but  it
                                                                                                ;

              will be useful to take a brief survey of the

ground before us first, and to arrange in their proper groups
THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.  101

the materials with which we have to deal. As was explained
in the second chapter, the evidence by which the Bible text is
examined and restored is threefold. It consists of (1) Manu-
SCEiPTS, (2) Versions, (3) Quotations in the Fathers .

 -- 1. Manuscripts. The early papyrus manuscripts of the New

Testament have all perished (unless indeed some are still lying
buried in the soil of Egypt, which is far from improbable), and all
the extant manuscripts are written on vellum, with the exception
of a few scraps of papyrus, not earlier than the earliest vellum
MSS., and some quite late copies, which are on paper. They are
divided into two great classes, according to the style in which they
are written, namely uncials and cursives. Uncials are those
written throughout in capital letters, each formed separately {see

-- Plates VI., VIII. XIII.). Cursives are those written in smaller

letters and in a more or less running hand {see Plate XIV.). As

explained above (p. 59), uncial manuscripts are the earliest, running

from the fourth century (and doubtless earlier if earlier MSS.
should be found) to the ninth, while cursives range from the ninth
to the fifteenth, and even later, wherever manuscripts were still

written after the invention of printing.*
    Uncial manuscripts, being the oldest, are also the rarest and the

most important. Including even the smallest fragments, only one
                          hundred and twelve uncial manuscripts of the

                    Greek New Testament are known to exist, and of

these only two contain all the books of it, though two more

are nearly perfect. The books of the New Testament, before

   * This sharp distinction in time between uncial and cursive writing does not
apply to papyri. Here we find cursive writing side by side with uncial from
the earliest times at which Greek writing is known to us (the third century B.C.).
The i-eason for the difference in the case of vellum MSS. is simply that vellum
was only employed for books intended for general use, and for such books
uncial writing was regularly used until the ninth century, because it was the
most handsome style. In the ninth century an ornamental style of running-
hand was invented, and this superseded uncials as the style usual in books.

A cursive hand must always have existed for use in private documents, where

publication was not intended.
102 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

they were gathered into one collection, Avere formed into four

groups, I'iz. Gospels, Acts and Catholic Epistles, Pauline Epistles,

Apocalypse ; and most manuscripts contain only one, or at

most two, of these groups. Uncial manuscripts are distinguished

for purposes of reference by capital letters of the Latin, Greek,

or Hebrew alphabets, such as A, B, A, Ji?, etc., as the reader may
see by looldng at the notes on any page of the New Testament

in the Variorum Bible. Eeserving a full description of these

manuscripts for the next chapter, it will be sufficient for the

present to say that the most important of them are those known

as B (Codex Vaticanus) and X (Codex Sinai ticus), which are

A assigned                                                           (Codex Alexandrinus) and C
to  the  fourth           century
                                                                  ;

D (Codex Ephraemi), of the fifth century ; (of the Gospels), Dj

(Pauline Epistles), and E2 (Acts and Catholic Epistles), of the

sixth century. These are the main authorities upon which the

text of the N'ew Testament is based, though they need to be

supplemented and reinforced by the testimony of the later copies,

both uncial and cursive.

Cursive manuscripts are enormously more common than uncials.

The earliest of them date from the ninth century, and from the

         tenth century to the fifteenth the cursives were

         the Bible of Eastern Europe. Many have no

doubt perished ; but from the fact of their having been written

nearer to the times of the revival of learning many have been

preserved. Every great library possesses several of them, and

many are no doubt still lurking in unexamined corners, especially

in out-of-the-way monasteries in the East. The latest enumeration

of those whose existence is known gives the total as 2429, besides

1273 Lectionaries, or volumes containing the lessons from the Xew

Testament prescribed to be read during the Church's year. Even

deducting duplicates, where a manuscript has been counted more

than once owing to its containing more than one of the above-

mentioned groups (each of which has a separate series of numbers),

the total comes to just over 3000. They are refen-ed to simply by

numbers ; for instance, Evan. 100 means cursive manuscript No. 100
THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.  103

= of the G-ospels,* Act. 100 cursive No. 100 of the Acts and Catholic
= Epistles, Paul. 100 cursive No. 100 of the Pauline Epistles,
= Apoc. 100 cursive No. 100 of the Apocalypse, Evst. {i.e. Evange-
= listarium) 100 lectionary of the Gospels No. 100, and Apost.
= 100 lectionary of the Acts and Epistles No. 100. Thus if a

manuscript contains more than one of these groups of books, it
appears in more than one list, and generally with a different
number in each ; for instance a certain manuscript in the British

Museum, which contains the whole New Testament (a very rare

occurrence, only about thirty MSS. in all being thus complete), is

consequently described as Evan. 584, Act. 228, Paul. 269, Apoc. 97.
These, however, are minutiae which concern only the Biblical

scholar. The cursive manuscripts, with few exceptions, are rarely

quoted as authorities for the text. Their importance is chiefly
collective, as showing which of two readings, where the leading
uncials are divided, has been adopted in the great mass of later
copies. In the Variorum Bible it has rightly been thought best to
omit all mention of them, as needlessly cumbering the critical

notes. The vast majority of cursives contain substantially the
same type of text, that, namely, which appears in the received text
and is translated in our Authorised Version. The cursives which
appear to contain a better and an older form of the text, approxi-
mating to that of the leading uncials, are those known as Act. 61

= = and Evan. 33 ( Act. 13 Paul. 17) ; next to these, Evan. 1, 13,

81, 157, 209 ; Act. 31, 44, 137, 180.

 -- 2. Versions. The most important versions, or translations of

the New Testament into other languages, are the Syriac, Egyptian,

and Latin. They will be described in detail in the next chapter
but one, but a short statement of their respective dates is necessary

here, in order that we may understand the history of the New

Testament text. As soon as Christianity spread beyond the borders
of Palestine there was a necessity for translations of the Scriptures

   * Evan, stands for Evangelium, the Latin form of the Greek word which
we translate " Gospel."
                                                                                                                                                                                 --

104 OUE BIBLE ANB THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

into all these languages. Syria was the nearest neighbour of

Palestine, Egypt a prominent literary centre and the home of many

Jews, while Latin was the language of Africa and Italy and the

West of Europe generally. At first, no doubt. Christian instruc-

tion was given by word of mouth, but in the course of the second

century written translations of most, at any rate, of the New

Testament books had been made in these languages ; and these

versions are of great value to us now, since from them we can

often gather what reading of a disputed passage was found in the

very early copies of the Greek Testament from which the original

translations were made. In Syeiac four versions are known to

have been made : (1) the Old Syriac, of the Gospels only ; (2) the

Peshitto, the standard translation of the whole Bible into Syriac ;

(3) the HarJcJeian, a revision made by Thomas of Harkel in

A.D. 616  of an  earlier                                                            version                                                made  in  a.d.   508                  (4) the Pales-
                                                                                                                                                                              ;

tinian, an independent version from the Greek, extant in fragments

only, and of doubtful date. Of these the Old Syriac and the

Peshitto are much the most important. In Egypt no less than

five versions were current in different dialects of the Coptic or

native tongue, but only two of these are at present known to be

important for critical purposes : (1) the 3Iemphiiic or Bohairic,

belonging to Lower Egypt                                                                                                                   (2) the Thebaic  or  Sahidic, of Upper
                                                                                                                                        ;

Egypt. Both of these appear to have been made about the

beginning of the third century, or perhaps earlier ; but the Thebaic

exists only in fragments. The Latin versions are two in number,

both of great importance : (1) the Old Latin, made early in the
second century, and extant (though only in fragments) in three

somewhat varying shapes, known respectively as African, Euro-

pean, and Italian                                                                   (2) the Vulgate, which is the revision of the
                                                                                 ;

Old Latin by St. Jerome at the end of the fourth century. Other

early translations of the Scriptures exist in various languages

Armenian, Ethiopian, Arabic, and Gothic ; but these are neither
so early nor so important as those we have mentioned. The Old

Syriac, Peshitto, Memphitic, Thebaic, Old Latin, and Yulgate

versions are referred to in the notes of the Variorum Bible, and
                                ;

THE TEXT OF THE KEW TESTAMENT.  105

they are unquestionably the most important of the versions for the

piu'poses of textual criticism.

  -- 3. Fathers. The evidence of early Christian writers for the text

of the New Testament begins to be available about the middle of

the second century. The most important are Justin Martyr (died
A.D. 164) ; Tatian, the author of a famous Harmony of the Gospels,
recently recovered in an Arabic translation (died a,i>. 172) ;
Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons, who flourished about a.d. 178 ; Clement
of Alexandria, at the end of the century ; Hippolytus of Rome
and Origen of Alexandria, in the first half of the third century
and the two great Latin writers of Africa, Tertullian and Cyprian,
the former at the beginning of the third century, and the latter
about the middle of it. Later still we have the great scholars,
Eusebius of Csesarea in the first half of the fourth century, and
Jerome in the second. The evidence of the Fathers has, however,
to be used with care. As has been already explained (p. 16),
copyists were liable to alter the words of a Scriptural quotation in
the Fathers into the shape most familiar to themselves, so that the
evidence of a Father is less trustworthy when it is in favour of a
commonly accepted reading than when it is against it ; and
further, the early writers were apt to quote from memory, and so
to make verbal errors. When, however, we can be sure that we
have a quotation in the form in which the Father actually wrote
it (and the context sometimes makes this certain), the evidence is
of great value, because the Father must have been copying from a
manuscript of the Bible much older than any that we now possess.
There is also this further advantage, that we generally know in
what part of the world each of the Fathers was writing, and so can
tell in what country certain corruptions of the text began or were
most common. This is a very important consideration in the part
of the inquiry to which we are now coming.

   Now when we have got all this formidable array of authorities,

--our three thousand Greek manuscripts, our versions in half-a-
-- dozen languages, and all the writings of the Fathers what more

can be done ? Are we simply to take their evidence on each
106 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

disputed passage, tabulate the authorities for each various reading,

and then decide according to the hest of our judgment which

reading is to be preferred in each several case ? Well, very much
can be, and very much has been done by this method. Allowing

proper weight for the superior age of the leading uncial manu-

scripts, so that the evidence of the uncials shall not be overborne by

the numerical preponderance of late cursives, a mere statement

of the authorities on either side will often be decisive. Thus, if

we find in Mark 7. 19 that eight of the later uncials and hundreds

of cursives have the received reading, " purging all meats," while

5^, A, B, E, F, G, H, L, S, X, A, and three Fathers have a

slight variety Avhich gives the sense, "This he said, making all

meats clean," no one will doubt that the superiority, both of

authority and of sense, is on the side of the latter, even though

the numerical  preponderance of MSS. is with the former                                                                                                                                                                                             and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ;

consequently we find that all editors and the Revised Version have

rejected the received reading. This is only one instance out of a

great many, which the reader of the Variorum Bible or of any

critical edition can easily pick out for himself, in which a simple

inspection of the authorities on either side and of the intrinsic

merit of the alternative readings is sufficient to determine the

judgment of editors without hesitation.

But is it possible to go beyond this ? Can we, instead of simply

estimating our authorities in order of their age, arrange them into

               groups which have descended from common an-

of authorises, cestors, and determine the age and character of
                      each group ? It is obvious that no manuscript

can have greater authority than that from which it is copied, and

that if a hundred copies have been taken, directly or indirectly,

from one manuscript, while five have been taken from another

which is older and better, then if we find the hundred supporting

one reading, while the five support another, it is the five and not

the hundred which we ought to follow. In other words, the

number of manuscripts in a group which has a common parentage

proves nothing, except that the form of test represented by that
                                                                 ;

              THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.  107

group was preferred in former times ; which may or may not

be an important factor of the evidence. It does not in itself prove

superiority in either age or merit. The question then arises, is it

possible to arrange the authorities for the test of the New Testa-

ment in groups of this kind ? The general answer of critics,

tacitly at least, has been, No. It has been very rare, in the history

of Biblical criticism, to find an editor forming his manuscripts

into groups. They have generally been content to use the best

manuscripts that were available to them, and to judge each on its
own merits, or even, at times, to decide every question according

to numerical preponderance among a small number of selected

manuscripts.

One critic of earlier days, however, Griesbach by name, at the

end of the last century, essayed the task of grouping, and two

              distinguished Cambridge scholars of our own day,

Hort's°theory. Bishop Westcott and the late Professor Hort,

                   have renewed the attempt with much greater

success. They believe that by far the larger number of our extant

MSS. can be shown to contain a revised (and less original) text

that a comparatively small group has texts derived from manu-

scripts which escaped, or were previous to, this revision ; and that,

consequently, the evidence of this small group is almost always

to be preferred to that of the great mass of MSS. and versions.

It is this theory, which has been set out with conspicuous learning

and conviction by Dr. Hort, that we propose now to sketch in

brief ; for it appears to mark an epoch in the history of New

Testament criticism.

  An examination of passages in which two or more different

readings exist shows that one small group of authorities, consisting

MSS.^hfN.T.   of the uncial manuscripts B, JiJ, L, a few cursives
              ^^^^ ^^ Evan. 33, Act. 61, and the Memphitic
              and Thebaic versions, is generally found in agree-

ment ; another equally clearly marked group consists of D, the Old
Latin and Old Syriac versions, and cursives 13, 69, 81 of the

Gospels, 44, 137, and 180 of the Acts, and Evst. 39, with a few
108 OUR BIBLE ANB THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

others more intermittently ; while A, C (generally), the later
uncials, and the great mass of cursives and the later versions form

another group, numerically overwhelming. Sometimes each of

these groups will have a distinct reading of its own ; sometimes
two of them will be combined against the third ; sometimes an
authority which usually supports one group will be found with

one of the others. But the general division into groups remains

constant and is the basis of the present theory.

Next, it is possible to distinguish the origins and relative

priority of the groups. In the first place, many passages occur

in which the first group described above has one

or "conflate" reading, the second has another, and the third

combines the two. Thus in the last words of

St. Luke's Gospel (as the Variorum Bible shows), X, B, C, L,

with the Memphitic and one Syriac version, have "blessing

A D God " ;
and the Old Latin have " praising God " ; but

and twelve other uncials, all the cursives, the Yulgate and other

versions, have " praising and blessing God." Instances like this

Now occur, not once nor twice, but repeatedly.    it is in itself

more probable that the combined reading in such cases is later

than, and is the result of, two separate readings. It is more likely

that a copyist, finding two different words in two or more manu-

scripts before him, would put down both in his copy, than that two

scribes, finding a combined phrase in their originals, would each

select one part of it alone to copy, and would each select a different

-- one. The motive for combining would be praiseworthy, the

desire to make sure of keeping the right word by retaining both
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;

but the motive for separating would be vicious, since it involves

the deliberate rejection of some words of the sacred text. More-

over we know that such combination was actually practised ; for,
as has been stated above, it is a marked characteristic of Lucian's

edition of the Septuagint.

At this point the evidence of the Fathers becomes important

as to both the time and the place of origin of these combined (or

as Dr. Hort technically calls them "conflate") readings. They
          THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.  109

are found to be characteristic of the Scripture quotations in

-  ,. ,.  .the works  of Chryjsostom,> who was bishorp of
Localisation of

groups by aid Antioch in Syria at the end of the fourth cen-

                 tury, and of other writers in or about Antioch at

the same time ; and thenceforward it is the predominant text in

manuscripts, versions, and quotations. Hence this type of text,

the text of our later uncials, cursives, early printed editions, and

Authorised Version, is believed to have taken its rise in or near

Antioch, and is known as the " Syrian " text. The type found in

the second of the groups above described, that headed by D, the
Old Latin and Old Syriac, is called the " Western " text, as being

especially found in Latin manuscripts and in those which (like D)

have both Greek and Latin texts, though it is certain that it had

its origin in the East, probably in or near Asia Minor. There

is another small group, earlier than the Syrian, but not represented

continuously by any one MS. (mainly by C in the Gospels, A, C,

in Acts and Epistles, with certain cursives and occasionally ^^ and
L), to which Dr. Hort gives the name of " Alexandrian." The

remaining group, headed by B, may be best described as the

"Neutral" text.

  Now among all the Fathers whose writings are left to us from

before the middle of the third century (notably Irenteus, Hippo-

                 lytus, Clement, Origen, Tertullian, and Cyprian),

reading^ Mest. ^^^ ^^^ readings belonging to the groups described
                       as Western, Alexandrian, and Neutral, but no

distinctly Syrian readings. On the other hand we have seen that

in the latter part of the fourth century, especially in the region of

Antioch, Syrian readings are found plentifully. Add to this the

fact that, as stated above, the Syrian readings often show signs

of having been derived from a combination of non-Syrian readings,

and we have strong confirmation of the belief, which is the corner-

stone of Dr. Hort's theory, that the Syrian type of text originated

"in a revision of the then existing texts, made about the end of the

third century in or near Antioch. The result of accepting this

conclusion obviously is, that where the Syrian text differs from
110 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

that of the other groups, it must be rejected as being of later
origin, and therefore less authentic ; and when it is remembered
that by far the greater number of our authorities contain a Syrian

text, the importance of this conclusion is manifest. In spite of

their numerical preponderance, the Syrian authorities must be

relegated to the lowest place.

Of the remaining groups, the "Western text is characterised by

considerable freedom of addition, and sometimes of omission.

               "Whole verses, or even longer passages, are found

^              ^^ manuscripts of tliis family, which are entirely
   group.^^'^  absent from all other copies. Some of them Avill

be found enumerated in the following chapter in the description of

D, the leading manuscript of this class. It is evident that this type

of text must have had its origin in a time when strict exactitude in

copying the books of the New Testament was not regarded as a
necessary virtue. In early days the copies of the New Testament

books were made for immediate edification, without any idea that

they would be links in a -chain for the transmission of the sacred

texts to a distant future ; and a scribe might innocently insert in
the narrative additional details which he believed to be true and

valuable. Fortunately the literary conscience of Antioch and

Alexandria was more sensitive, and so this tendency did not spread

very far, and was checked before it had greatly contaminated the
Bible text. Western manuscripts often contain old and valuable

readings, but any variety which shows traces of the characteristic
"Western vice of amplification or explanatory addition must be

rejected, unless it has strong support outside the purely Western

group of authorities.
   There remain the Alexandrian and the Xeutral groups. The

Alexandrian text is represented, not so much by any individual

                     MS. or version, as by certain readings found
" Alexandrian " scattered about in manuscripts which elsewhere be-

               long to one of the other groups. They are readings

which have neither Western nor Syrian characteristics, and yet
differ from what appears to be the earliest form of the text ; and
            THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.  Ill

being found most regularly in the quotations of Origen, Cyril of

Alexandria, and other Alexandrian Fathers, as well as in the

Memphitic version, they are reasonably named Alexandrian.

Their characteristics are such as might naturally be due to such a

centre of Greek scholarship, since they affect the style rather than

the matter, and appear to rise mamly from a desire for correctness

of language. They are consequently of minor importance, and are

not always distinctly recognisable.

   The Neutral text, which we believe to represent most nearly the

original text of the New Testament, is chiefly recognisable by the

            absence of the various forms of aberration noticed

^           ^^ ^^^ other groups. Its main centre is at Alex-
  group.^*  andria, but it also appears in places widely

removed from that centre. Sometimes single authorities of the

AVestern group will part company with the rest of their family and

exhibit readings which are plainly both ancient and non-Western,

showing the existence of a text preceding the "Western, and on

which the Western variations have been grafted. This text must

therefore not be assigned to any local centre. It belonged origi-

nally to all the Eastern world. In many parts of the East, notably

in Asia Minor, it was superseded by the text which, from its

transference to the Latin churches, we call Western. It remained

pure longest in Alexandria, and is found in the writings of the

Alexandrian Fathers, though even here slight changes of language

Avere introduced, to which we have given the name of Alexandrian.

Our main authority for it at the present day is the great Vatican

manuscript known as B, and this is often supported by the

equally ancient Sinaitic manuscript (x), and by the other manu-
scripts and versions named above (p. 107). Where the readings
of this Neutral text can be plainly discerned, as by the concurrence
of all or most of these authorities, they may be accepted with con-

fidence in the face of all the numerical preponderance of other

texts ; and in so doing Lies our best hope of recovering the true

words of the New Testament.

The following diagram may perhaps serve to make more clear
112 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBII>TS.

the various groups of textual authorities, all more or less divergent
from the true and original text. It must be understood, however,
that it is only a very rough approximation to the facts, the inter-
mixture of texts in all extant manuscripts being far too comphcated
to be represented by any diagram. The Western family is depicted
on the left, the Syrian on the right, the Alexandrian and the
Neutral between them.

M.D.           Orit/iniU Mi'S.
JOO
200

300

S)0
600

               'Lastj

                                Jirceivtit

   Such is, in brief, the theory of Dr. Hort. Its importance in the
history of the Bible text, especially in England, is evident when it

Importance of  is seen that it largely influenced the Eevisers of
Westcott and
Hor s eory.    our English Bible. The text underlymg the
               ]jgyjgg(j Version does not indeed go so far as that

of Westcott and Hort in its departure from the received text and

from the mass of manuscripts other than B, $<? , and their fellows ;
but it is unquestionable that the cogent arguments of the Cam-

bridge Professors had a great effect on the Eevisera, and most of

the leading scholars of the country have given in their allegiance

to the theory. It is indeed on these lines alone that progress in

Biblical criticism is possible. The mere enumeration of authorities

-- for and against a disputed reading, the acceptance of the verdict
-- of a majority is plainly impossible, since it would amount to con-
         THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.     118

structing our text from the latest aad least original MS8. To

select a certain number of the earliest MSS. and count their votes

alone (as was done by Lachmann) is better ; but this too is un-
critical, and involves the shutting of our eyes to much light which

is at our service. To estimate the intrinsic merit of each reading

in a disputed passage, taking into account the ^e/«e/Y<? predominance

of good authorities on one side or the other, is better still, and

good critics have gone far by this method ; but it still leaves much

to the personal taste and judgment of the critic, which in the last

resort can never be convincing. Only if our authorities can be

-- divided into groups if their genealogical tree, so to speak, can be

traced with some approach to certainty, so that the earlier branches

-- may be distinguished from the later, only so is there any chance

of our criticism advancing on a sound basis and being able to com-

mand a general assent.

It is, however, only fair to admit that Dr. Hort's theory has not

been accepted by all competent judges, and that some, notably

                Dr. Scrivener and Dean Burgon, are vehemently

                      opposed to it {are, we may say, for though they,
like the great scholar whom they criticised, have passed away

from earth, their opinions and their writings live on). The main

difficulty (and it is a real one) in the theory is that there is ab-

solutely no historical confirmation of the Syrian revision of the text,

which is its corner-stone. It is rightly urged that it is very

strange to find no reference among the Fathers to so important an

event as an official revision of the Bible text and its adoption as the

standard text throughout the Greek world. We know the names

of the scholars who made revisions of the Septuagint and of the
Syriac vei-sion ; but there is no trace of those who carried out the

far more important work of fixing the shape of the Greek New

Testament. Is not the whole theory artificial and illusory, the

vain imagining of an ingenious mind, like so many of the pro-

ducts of modern criticism, which spins endless webs out of its own

interior, to be swept away to-morrow by the ruthless broom of

common sense ?

S 2764.                                  H
114 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

Against this indictment may be placed the consideration that

even if we can find no historical reference to a revision, yet the

              critical reasons which indicated the separation of

of^ljiecUonT  ^^^ Syrian text from the rest, and its inferiority
              in date, remain untouched. "We still have the

groups of authorities habitually found in conjunction ; we still
have the fact that the readings of the group we have called Syrian

are shown by their intrinsic character to be probably later than

the non-Syrian ; and we still have the fact that readings of the

Syrian type are not found in any authorities earlier than about

A.D. 250. Unless these facts can be controverted, the division into

groups and the relative inferiority of the Syrian group must be

considered to be established. At the same time, if it is permissible

to suggest a modification of Dr. Hort's theory, it does seem possible

that the formal revision of the sacred text in or about Antioch

may be a myth. Dr. Hort himself divides the revision into two

stages, separated by some interval of time, and thus doubles the

difficulty of accounting for the total absence of any mention of

a revision. It seems possible that the Syrian text is the result

rather of a process continued over a considerable period of time

than of a set revision by constituted authorities. In the com-

paratively prosperous days of the third century the Church had

leisure to collect and compare different copies of the Scriptures

hitherto passing without critical examination. At a great centre
of Christianity, such as Antioch, the principle may have been

established by general consent that the best way to deal with di-

vergencies of readings was to combine them, wherever possible, to

smooth away difficulties and harshnesses, and to produce an even

and harmonious text. Such a principle might easily be adopted by

the copyists of a single neighbourhood, and so lead in time to the

creation of a local type of text, just as the Western text must be

supposed to have been produced, not by a formal revision, but by

the development of a certain way of dealing with the text in a

certain region. The subsequent acceptance of the Antiochian or

Syrian type as the received text of the Greek New Testament
          THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.                                                 115

would be due to the action of Constantine on the adoption of

Christianity by the Empire. The fifty copies which Eusebius of

Caesarea caused to be made at the Emperor's command for the

churches of Constantinople would naturally follow the texts current

in his own neighbourhood and represented in the library of Pam-

philus which existed at Cassarea. But since Antioch was probably

in more intimate connection with Syria and Palestine than was

Alexandria, these texts would most naturally be of the Syrian

type ; and when Constantinople and Antioch led the way, the

rest of the Creek world would be likely to follow.

It is at any rate certain that this one type of text predominated

in the Eastern world from the fifth century onwards ; that the
Creek manuscripts which found their way westward at the close of

the Middle Ages were entirely of this class, and that it was from
these that the " received text " of the Creek Scriptures was con-

structed in the early days of printed editions. On the basis of this

text our  Authorised  Version  was made                                              and it still survives in all
                                                                                  ;

the ordinary printed copies of the Creek Testament. Only within

the last two centuries, and especially within the last fifty years, has

the attempt been seriously made to use all the available materials in

order to correct this text and to get back as nearly as may be to

the original language of the sacred books. It is always possible,

and not even improbable, that the soil of Egypt, so fertile in dis-

coveries, may yet be preserving for us copies on papyrus earlier

than any manuscripts which we now possess ; but, except for such

external aid, the best hope for progress in textual criticism appears

to lie along the track that has been opened out by the genius and

learning of Dr. Hort.

                                                                                     H2
                                               ( 116 )

             APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VI.

      THE CHIEF EDITIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

      -- earliest printed editions of the New Testament tiiose of
THE -- Erasmus, Ximenes, Stephaniis, and Beza have been men-

tioned in the preceding chapter (pp. 98, 99), and there would be
little profit or interest in a list of all the editions which have
followed these down to the present day. But since certain editors
stand out above their fellows by reason of their exceptional services
towards the improvement of the text, and their opinions are often
quoted among the authorities presented to the student in critical

editions, it may be useful to give (mainly from the more detailed

histories of Tregelles and Scrivener) some slight record of their
labours, and of the principles adopted bj them. It will not be
inappropriate, in a history of the Bible text, to record the names
of those who have especially devoted their lives to the task of
freeing it from the errors of past ages, and the restoration of it, as

near as may be, to its original truth.

   There are two steps in this operation ; first, the collection of
evidence, and, secondly, the using of it. The " received text," as
shown above, was based on the comparison of a few manuscripts,
mostly of late date, and for more than a century the most pressing
need was the examination of more and better manuscripts. Brian
Walton, afterwards Bishop of Chester, led the way in 1657, by
publishing in his Polyglott Bible the readings of fourteen hitherto
unexamined MSS., including the uncials. A, D, and D, ; but the

real father of this department of textual criticism is John Mill

(1645-1710), of Queen's College, Oxford. Mill, in 1707, reprinted
Stephanus' text of 1550, with only accidental divergencies, but
added the various readings of nearly 100 manuscripts, and thereby
provided all subsequent scholars with a broad basis of established

evidence. Richaed Bentlet (1662-1742), the most famous of

all EngHsh classical scholars, planned a critical edition of the New

Testament in both Greek and Latin, and to that end procured
        THE CHIEF EDITIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 117

 collations of a large number of good manuscripts in both lan-
 guages ; but an increasing sense of the complexity of the task, and

 the distraction of other occupations, prevented the completion of

 his work, and his masses of materials proved of little use. He

 had, however, stimulated others to carry on the task he left un-

 finished, and J. J. "VVetstein (1693-1754), of Basle, who had
 originally worked for Bentley, made very large additions to the

stores of manuscript evidence. His New Testament, published in

 1751-2, quotes the readings of more than 300 MSS., including
 nearly all those which are now recognised as being of the greatest
value. To this list some seventy more were added by C. F.
 Matth.ei (1744-1811).

    Meanwhile other scholars had begun to turn their attention to
the use of the materials thus collected ; and the pioneer of critical
method was J. A. Bengel, of Tiibingen (1687-1752). To this
scholar belongs the honour of having been the first to divide the

manuscripts of the New Testament into groups. The great

majority of MSS. he a-^signed to a group which he called the
Asiatir, though its headquarters were at Constantinople, while the

few better ones were classed as African. Bengel did not, however,
advance far with this principle, and the first working out of it

must be assigned to J. J. Griesbach (1745-1812), who made a
careful classification of MSS. into three groups, the Alexandrian,
the Western, and the Byzantine. These groups roughly correspond

to the Neutral, Western, and Syrian groups of Dr. Hort, of whom
Griesbach is the .true forerunner. On the basis of this classifica-

tion Griesbach drew up lists of readings which he regarded as, in
greater or less degree, preferable to those of the received text, and
so paved the way for the formal construction of a revised Greek
Testament.

    So far all editors had been content to reprint the received text

of the New Testament, merely adding their collections of various

readings in foot-notes ; but with the nineteenth century a new
departure was made, and we reach the region of modern textual
criticism, of which the principle is, setting aside the "received
118 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

text," to construct a new text with the help of the best authorities
now available. The author of this new departure was C. Lachmanu
(1793-1851), who published in 1842-50 a text constructed accord-
ing to principles of his own devising. Out of all the mass of
manuscripts collected by Mill, Wetsteiu, and their colleagues, he
selected a few of the best (A, B, C, and sometimes D, with the
fragments P, Q, T, Z, in the Gospels ; D, E2,,in the Acts ; Ds, Gra,
Ha, in the Pauline Epistles ; togetlier with some of the best MSS.
of the Latin Vulgate, and a few of the Fathers), and from these

he endeavoured to recover the text of the New Testament as it

was current in the fourth century (when the earliest of these
authorities were written) by the simple method of counting the
authorities in favour of each reading, and always following the
majority. Lachmann's method was too mechanical in its rigidity,
and the list of his authorities was too small ; at the same time his

use of the best authorities led him to many unquestionable im-
provements on the received text. Lachmann was followed by the
two great BibUcal critics of the last generation, Tischendorf and
Tregelles, who unite in themselves the two distinct streams ol
textual criticism, being eminent alike in the collection and the use
of evidence. A. F. C. Tischendokf (1815-1874) published no
fewer than eight editions of the Greek New Testament, with an
increasing quantity of critical material in each ; and the last of

these (1864-72, with prolegomena on the MSS., versions, etc., by
Gregory, in 1884-94) remains still the standard collection of
evidence for the Greek text. Besides this, he published trustworthy
editions of a large number of the best individual manuscripts,
crowning the whole with his great discovery and publication of the
Codex Sinaiticus, as described in the next chapter. Tischendorf's
services in the publication of texts (including X, C, D-,., Eg, L, and

many more of the Greek New Testament, with the Codex Amia-

tinus of the Latin) are perfectly inestimable, and have done more
than anything else to establish textual criticism on a sound basis.

His use of his materials, in his revisions of the New Testament

text, is less satisfactory, owing to the considerable fluctuations in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ;

       THE CHIEF EDITIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 119

his judgments between one edition and the next ; but here, too,
his work has been very useful. S. P. Tregelles (1813-1875)
published only two MSS. in full, but collated very many with great
accuracy, and used his materials with judgment in the preparation
of a revised text. Like Lachmann, he based his text exclusively
on the ancient authorities but he used a larger number of them,
paid much attention to the versions and Fathers, and did not tie
himself down to obedience to a numerical majority among his
witnesses. Like Tischendorf, he followed no principle of grouping

in his use of his authorities, so that his choice of readings is liable

to depend on personal preference among the best attested variants
but his experience and judgment were such as to entitle his opinion

to very great weight.

   Of Westcott and Hort we have spoken at length in the pre-
ceding chapter, showing how they revived Griesbach's principle,

and worked it out with greater elaboration and with a far fuller
command of material. Their names close, for the present, the

list of editors of the Greek New Testament whose attention has

been directed especially to its text rather than (as with Alford,
Lightfoot, Weiss, and others) its interpretation. It is right, how-

ever, to mention the names of one or two scholars who have

devoted their attention to textual studies without actually publish-

ing revised texts of their own. Chief among these is F. H. A.

Scrivener, who, besides editing the manuscripts D and F, and

collating a number of cursives, wrote, in his Introduction to the

Criticism of the Neiv Testament, the standard history of the New
Testament text. J. W. Burgon, Dean of Chichester, was another

scholar of immense industry, learning, and zeal in textual matters,
although his extreme distaste for innovations led him to oppose,
rightly or wrongly, nearly every new departure in this field or in
any other. To Scrivener and Burgon may especially be attributed

the defence of the principle that all the available authorities should,
so far as possible, be taken into consideration, and not only the

most ancient. They attached much weight to the evidence of the

great mass of MSS. headed by A and C, while they opposed the
120 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

tendency of Westcott and Horfc, and their followers, to defer

almost invariably to the testimony of B and X. In this respect
they are supported by J. B. M'^Clellan, who published in 1875

an English version of the Gospels, based upon a revision of

the Greek, in which internal probability is taken as the most

trustworthy guide  in  the  selection  between  disputed  readings                                        a
                                                                                                       ;

principle which leaves much to the individual judgment, and in-

curs the danger of determining what it is right that God's Word

should say, instead of patientiy examining to see what it does say.

   The foregoing list includes all the editors whom the reader
may expect to find often quoted in any textual commentary

on the Bible which he is likely to use, and may, it is hoped,
help him to understand the principles on which their opinions

are given. To the reader who wishes to find a statement of
the evidence on all im]3ortant passages in the New Testament,

without wading through such a mass of material as that pro-

vided by Tischendorf, the following hints may be useful. The

Cambridge school Greek Testament, edited by Scrivener, gives

the received text, with notes stating the readings adopted by

Lachmann, Tischendorf, Tregelles, Westcott and Hort, and the

Eevised Version of 1881. The Oxford Greek Testament, which

contains the received text as edited by Bishop Lloyd in 1828, has

recently been provided by Prof. Sanday with an appendix contain-

ing an admirable selection of various readings, and a statement of

m the principal manuscripts, versions. Fathers, and editors favour

of each, and, in addition, a complete collation of the text of West-

cott and Hort. This may be confidently recommended to students
who wish for a handy critical edition of the Greek text. Finally,

the student who prefers to use the English Bible will find a simi-

lar collection of evidence, amply sufficient for all practical purposes,

and excellently selected by Prof. Sanday and Mr. R. L. Clarke, in

the notes to the Variorum Bible ; where he will likewise find notes

which summarize the best opinions on the translation, as well as

the text, of the most important passages about which there is any

doubt.
                                                                      ( 1-^1 )

                         CHAPTER VII.

          THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

THE romance of Biblical criticism is to be found in connection

       with the history of the manuscripts, and especially of the

most ancient of them, from which the best of our knowledge is
derived. Their fortunes, even in compax'atively modern days, have
often been full of interest ; and from their venerable pages we can
spell out something of their history in the distant ages in which
they first saw the light. In this chapter we shall trace the history
of a few of the most important of them, and shall give facsimiles
of their outward appearance ; so that to the reader who studies
the pages of a critical Greek text or the Variorum edition of the

English Bible, the symbols 5^, A, B, C, D, and the rest which
pervade its notes may be no longer meaningless combinations
of letters, but may stand for separate books which he knows

individually, and whose characteristics and peculiarities he has

studied.

   It has already been stated (p. 101) that Greek manuscripts are
divided into two classes, known, according to the manner of their
writing, as uncials or cursives ; and that of these the uncials are
at once the oldest and the most important. The uncials are

known, for the sake of brevity, by the capital letters of the

alphabet, though each of them possesses some special name as

We well.     shall now proceed to describe the best of them in

the order of their alphabetical precedence. Some of them we

have met already in our catalogue of the manuscripts of the

Septuagint.

{1^.  Codex  Sinaiticus                                               the last found of all the flock, yet one  of
                                                                   ;

the most important, and therefore (since the letters of the common

alphabet had been already appropriated for other manuscripts)
designated by its discoverer by the first letter of the Hebrew
alphabet, AIpjj/i. The discovery of this manuscript, fifty-one
122 OUR BIBLE AXD THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

years ago, was the supreme triumph of the great Biblical scholar,
Constantine Tischendorf. In the year 1844 he was travelling in
the East in search of manuscripts, and in the course of his travels

he visited the monastery of St. Catherine at Mount Sinai. He

was taken into the library, and after surveying the books on the
shelves he noticed a basket containing a large number of stray
pages of manuscripts, among which he was astounded to behold
several leaves of the oldest Greek writing he had ever set eyes on,
and, as a short inspection proved, containing parts of the Greek

Bible. No less than forty-three such leaves did he extract, and

the librarian casually observed that two basket loads of similar
waste paper had already been used to light the fires of the
monastery. It is therefore not surprising that he easily obtained
permission to keep the leaves which he had picked up ; but when
he discovered that some eighty more leaves of the Old Testament
from the same manuscript were also in existence, difficulties were

made about letting him see them ; and he had to content himself
with informing the monks of their value, and entreating them to
light ,their fires with something less precious. He then returned
to Europe, and having presented his treasure to his sovereign. King

Frederic Augustus of Saxony, published its contents under the

name of the Codex Friderico-Augustanus. These forty-three leaves
belonged, like all that Tischendorf had yet seen or heard of, to the
Old Testament, containing portions of 1 Chronicles and Jeremiah,
with Nehemiah and Esther complete ; they are now, as we have
seen (p. 59), at Leipzig, separated from the rest of the volume to

which they once belonged. In 1853 he returned to Sinai ; but
his former warning, and perhaps the interest aroused in Europe
by the discovery, had made the monks cautious, and he could hear
nothing more concerning the manuscript. In 1859 he visited the
monastery once again, this time under the patronage of the Czar
Alexander II., the patron of the Greek Church ; but still his in-
quiries were met with blank negation, until one evening, only a
few days before he was to depart, in the course of conversation
with the steward of the monastery, he showed him a copy of Iiis
        THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 123

recently published edition of the Septuagint. Thereupon the
steward remarked that he too had a copy of the Septuagint, which
he should like to show to his visitor. Accordingly he took him
to his room, and produced a heap of loose leaves wrapped in a
cloth ; and there before the astonished scholar's eyes lay the
identical manuscript for which he had been longing. Not only

was part of the Old Testament there, but the New Testament,

complete from beginning to end. Concealing his feelings, he
asked to be allowed to keep it in his room that evening to ex-
amine it ; leave was given, " and that night it seemed sacrilege
to sleep." Then the influence of the Russian Emperor was
brought into play. It was represented to the monks that it would
be a most appropriate step to present the manuscript to the great
protector of their Church. This reasoning, backed by whatever
influence could be brought to bear, was successful ; Tischendorf
first obtained leave to have the manuscript sent after him to
Cano and copy it there ; next to carry it with him to Russia for
fuither study ; and finally to lay it as a gift (in return for which
presents were made to the monks by the Russian Government) at
the feet of the Czar at St. Petersburg, in the library of which
capital it has thenceforth remained.

   The romance of the Codex Sinaiticus was not yet over, however.
Since the year 1856 an ingenious Greek, named Constantine
Simonides, had been creating a considerable sensation by produc-
ing quantities of Greek manuscripts professing to be of fabulous

-- antiquity, such as a Homer in an almost prehistoric style of

writing, a lost Egyptian historian, a copy of St. Matthew's Gospel
on papyrus, written fifteen years after the Ascension (!), and other

portions of the New Testament dating from the first century.

These productions enjoyed a short period of notoriety, and were

then exposed as forgeries. Among the scholars concerned in the

exposure was Tischendorf ; and the revenge taken by Simonides
was distinctly humorous. While stoutly maintaining the genuine-
ness of his own wares, he admitted that he had written one
manuscript which passed as being very ancient, and that was the
                                                                 ;

124 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

Codex Sinaiticus, the discovery of which had been so trium-

phantly proclaimed by Tischendorf ! The idea was insrenious, but

it would not bear investigation. Apart from the internal evidence

of the text itself, the variations in which no forger, however clever,

could have invented, it was shown that Simonides could not have

completed the task in the time which he professed to have taken

and this little cloud on the credit of the newly-discovered manu-

script rapidly passed away.

Plate VIII. gives a general idea of the appearance of this

manuscript. The original size of the page is 15 inches by

13^ inches. There are four narrow columns to each page (the only

known instance of so many), and the eight columns thus presented

to the reader when the volume is opened have much of the appear-

ance of the succession of columns in a papyi-us roll ; and it is not

at all impossible that it was actually copied from such a roll.

The vellum is made from the finest skins of antelopes, and is of

excellent quality ; the writing is large, clear, and good, without
any attempt at ornamentation. The MS. originally contained the

whole Greek Bible, but, as has been stated above (p. 59), only a

part of the Old Testament escaped the waste-paper basket of the

Sinai monastery. The New Testament is complete, and at the end

are added two apocryphal works, which for a long time enjoyed

almost equal credit with the New Testament books, but finally

failed to obtain a position in the Canon, namely the Epistle of
Barnabas and the " Shepherd " of Hermas. The original text has

been corrected in many places, the various coiTcctors being indica-

X% ted in critical editions as  X^, N°, etc. The date of the manu-

script is in the fourth century, probably about the middle or end

of it. It can hardly he earlier than a.d. 340, since the divisions

of the text known as the Eusebian sections are indicated in the

margin of the Gospels, in a hand evidently contemporaneous with

the text ; and these sections, which are a device for forming a

sort of Harmony of the Gospels, by showing which sections in each

Gospel have parallel sections in any of the others, were due to the

scholar Eusebius, who died about a.d. 340. On the other hand.
PLATE VIII,

             ztz               ·^'<

^ ·^ -^ £.
iz-          z-^ -^-cU^r=-xr
             yt Z ^ '-^
      5      -^          7 1^
      v

2-
2Z

5t
                                                                        ;

THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 125

the character of the writing shows that it can hardly be later than

the fourth century. The oldest coiTector, K% is not much later

than the manuscript itself, and must have made his corrections

from a very good and ancient copy. J<^ is of the sixth century

{<'=, a very active con-ector, of the seventh ; the othere, later and

of small importance.

A study of the facsimile page will show something of the way ir

which manuscripts were written and corrected, besides providing

K a specimen of the readings of in an important passage. The

page contains Luke 22. 20-52, though it has been necessary to

omit eight lines from the top of each column in the plate. In

K V. '2,2 (the first line of the plate), has " for " (ox*) in place of the

received text " and " ; and, as the note in the Variorum Bible

shows, X is supported by B, D, and L among the principal MSS.,

A while  heads the mass of later uncials and cursives which

contain the "received" reading. Of the editors. Tischendorf.

Tregelles, M^Clellan, Westcott and Hort, and the Revised A ersion

follow ^5, while Lachmann and Weiss are on the other side. In

1. 2 the scribe has accidentally omitted the little word /Aey, and

has added it above the line. At 1. 14, which begins verse 24, will

K be seen an example of the usual procedure of in marking the

beginning of a fresh paragraph by allowing the first letter to pro-

ject into the margin, but without any enlargement. In 1. 15 the

original scribe had written e«? eavrov:, which is found in no other

MS., but it has been corrected to the usual tv av-roiq : there is

practically no difference in sense. In 11. 22, 23 (verse 25) there

is a more extensive alteration. The scribe began by writing koli o«

{^"aud dfXfiv-e^ Tuv i^oixTux^ova-iv avTuv /cat evepyerut Ka'Aovvrai  their

rulers exercise authority over them and are called benefactors "),
which makes nonsense ; accordingly he (or a corrector) has can-

celled the erroneous letters apxovTe<; ruv by putting dots above them

(a common method in Greek MSS.), has altered the verb into

a participle by writing the letters vre^ over the eiToneous va-iv, and

has cancelled /ca* (" and ") by dots above each letter, thus restor-

ing the text to its proper form. In v. 31 (col. 2, 1. 7) there is a
126 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

disputed reading, some authorities having the words "And the Lord

said," as in our Authorised Version, while others omit them. The

A evidence is evenly balanced. Not only and the mass of later
D MSS., but also X, as our plate shows, and give the disputed
B words {eiitev 8e o Kvpio^), while and L, with the two chief Coptic

versions, omit them. Lachmann, Tregelles, and M^'Clellan retain

the words (see the Variorum note) ; Alford, Tischendorf, and

Westcott  and  Hort  reject  them                            and  the  Eevisers have followed
                                                          ;

the latter, though the division of the best evidence must have

D made a decision difficult, 5<{ and                         being a fair set-off against

B and L, even if the " Syrian " MSS. be disregarded.

   Small alterations in the MSS. must be passed over briefly ; they
The will be seen in col. 2, 1. 37 ; col. 3, 11. 5, 6 ; col. 4, 1. 36.
reader may also note the common practice of writing the last

letters of a line very small, so as to get more into a line. But in

verses 43, 44, a very important textual question arises. These

verses contain the mention of the Bloody Sweat, and of the Angel

-- who appeared to strengthen our Lord in His agony, an incident,

it is hardly necessary to say, of the deepest interest and value.

Now these verses are omitted by the two great manuscripts A and

B (so seldom found on the same side that their agreement is the
B more striking), and also by and T, the valuable cursives 13 and

69, some MSS. of the Bohairic and Sahidic versions, and by some

of the Fathers. Against these there were, before the discovery of

D J^, to be set only and L among the better uncials, the Old Latin

and Vulgate, the Peshitto Syriac, other MSS. of the Coptic versions,

many Fathers, and the mass of later MSS. The better authorities

might fairly be said to be against the genuineness of the verses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;

and it is consequently very satisfactory to find them contained in

the two newly discovered witnesses, ^{ and the Curetonian Syriac*

They will be seen in the last ten lines of col. 3 on our plate. The

reader who looks closely at it, however, will see that a faint row of

dots has been placed above the first line of the passage, and equally

faint hooks or commas at the beginning and end of each of these

* The latest discovery, however, the Sinaitic MS. of the Old Syriac, omits them.
                                                              --

THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 127

lines. This shows that some corrector did not find the verses in

the copy with which he was comparing the MS. and accordingly

marked them as doubtful. Tischendorf believed the marks to be

due to the first corrector of the MS., who certainly used a good

and ancient copy, and accordingly in the Variorum note we find J»«{*
enumerated among the authorities against the verses ; but it is
obviously difficult to be sure to what hand such simple marks are

to be attributed. It is clear that the verses were absent from some

very early copies : but it is also clear that some equally early ones

contained them ; and the majority of editors have shown a wise

discretion in prefening the evidence in favour of their authenticity.

Our analysis of this single page of the Codex Sinaiticus will

have shown the reader something of the task of the textual critic,

and something of the variations which he meets in every MS.,

some of them being mere slips of the pen on the part of the scribe,

while others testify to a real peculiarity of reading in the MS.

from which this was copied. It remains to say something as to

the general character of this ancient authority, and of the rank

which critics assign it among the array of Avitnesses to the text of
the New Testament.

   Besides being one of the most ancient, the Codex Sinaiticus is

also one of the most valuable texts of the New Testament. In
many passages it is found in company with B, preserving obviously

superior readings where the great mass of later manuscripts is in
error. According to the analysis of Westcott and Hort, its text is

almost entirely pre-Syrian ; but it is not equally free from "Western

and Alexandrian elements. Especially in the Gospels, readings

from these two sources are not unfrequent. Western readings being
most prominent in St. John and in parts of St. Luke. One most

noticeable case in which this manuscript is found in agreement

B with is in the omission of the last twelve verses of St, Mark, in
which >{ and B stand alone against all the other extant manu-

scripts (with the partial exception of L), though with some impor-

tant support from three versions and some of the Fathers. With

K respect to the agreement of  and B one curious fact should,
              t

128 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

X however, be noticed ; namely, that several pages of are actually

written by the scribe who wrote B. This fact, which is admitted
by competent scholars who have had the opportunity of judging,
indicates some amount of community of origin ; but it is at the
same tim evident that both were not copied from the same
original, so tnau une mdepenaeuce of their testimony is not
seriously impaired. The most that we learn is that both were
probably written in the same country. What that country was is
extremely doubtful. Dr. Hort is "inclined to surmise," from

certain very slight indications of orthography, that they were

written in the West, probably at Rome ; and that the ancestors of
B were also written in the West, while those of ^; were written in
Alexandria. On the other hand, forms of letters are occasionally
found in B which are believed to be exclusively Egyptian ; and

the writing of J< bears a quite discernible resemblance to a hand
which is found (at a considerably earlier date) in papyri from
Egypt. Another eminent scholar. Prof. Rendel Harris, believes
that both manuscripts came from the library of Pamphilus at
Csesarea, of which Eusebius made use ; but this would not
necessarily be inconsistent with their having been written in

Egypt. On the whole, however, this is one of the cases where the

only fair course is to admit ignorance, and to hope that future

discoveries may in time bring fuller knowledge.

 -- A. Codex Alexandrinus. This is one of the chief treasures of

the British Museum, where the volume containing the New Testa-
ment may be seen by every visitor in one of the show-cases in the

Department of Manuscripts. Its history, at least in later years, is

much less obscure than that of the Sinaiticus. In 1624 it was
offered by Cyril Ijucar, Patriarch of Constantinople, to Sir Thomas
Roe, our ambassador in Turkey, for presentation to King James I.
King James died before the manuscript started for England, and

the offer was transferred to Charles I. In 1627 the gift was
actually accomplished, and the MS. remained in the possession of
our sovereigns until the Royal Library was presented to the nation
by George II., when it entered its present home. Its earlier
THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. ]2f>

history is also partially traceable. Cyril Lucar brought it to/

Constantinople from Alexandria, of which see he had previously

been Patriarch ; and an Arabic note at the beginning of the MS., i
signed by " Athanasius the humble " (probably Athanasius III.,

Patriarch of Alexandria, who died about 1308), states that it was a

A gift to the Patriarchal cell in that town,  later Latin note adds

that the gift was made in a.d. 1098, but the authority for this

statement is unknown. Another Arabic note, written in the

thirteenth or fourteenth century, states that the MS. was written

by Thecla the martyr ; and Cyril Lucar himself repeats this state-

ment, with the additions that Thecla was a noble lady of Egypt,

that she wrote it shortly after the Council of Xicasa (a.d. 325), and
that her name was originally written at the end of the manuscript.

This, however, was only tradition, since the end of the MS. had

been lost long before Cyril's time. The authority for the tradition

is quite unknown, and so early a date is hardly probable. The

occmTence in the manuscript of treatises {see p. 60) by Eusebius (died
A.D. 340) and Athanasius (died a.d. 376) makes it almost certain

that it cannot be earliei' than the middle of the fourth century,

and competent authorities agree that the style of writing probably

shows it to be somewhat later, in the first half of the fifth century.

It is certain that the writing of this MS. appears to be somewhat

more advanced than that of the Yaticanus or Sinaitictis, especially

in the enlargement of initial letters and similar elementary orna-

mentation ; but it must be remembered that these characteristics
are already found in earHer MSS., and that similar diiTerences

between contemporary MSS. may be found at all periods. The

dating of early Greek uncials on vellum is still very doubtful for

want of materials to judge from, and it is possible that the tradi-

tion mentioned above is truer than is  generally supposed                                                                                  but for
                                                                                                                                        ;

the present it is safer to acquiesce in the general judgment which

assigns the manuscript to the fifth century.

Like the Codex Sinaiticus, it contained originally the whole

Greek Bible, with the addition of the two Epistles of Clement of

Rome, which in very early days ranked almost with the inspired

S 2764.                                                                                                                                    I
130 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANU8CBIPTS.

books ; and, in addition, the table of contents shows that it

originally included the Psalms of Solomon, the title of which,

however, is so separated from the rest of the books as to indicate

that they were regarded as standing on a different footing.

The Old Testament has suffered some slight mutilations, which

have been described already ; the New Testament more seriously,

since the whole of St. Matthew's Gospel, as far as ch. 25. 6, is lost,

-- together with leaves containing John 6. 50 8. .52 (where, however,

the number of pages missing shows that the doubtful passage,

-- 7. 53 8. 11, cannot have been present when the MS. was perfect),
-- and 2 Cor. 4. 13 12. 6, one leaf of the first Epistle of Clement

and the greater part of the second. The leaves measure 12| inches

by 10^, having two columns to each page, written in a large and

well-formed hand of round shape, with initial letters enlarged

and projecting into the margin. The text has been corrected

throughout by several different hands, the first being nearly or

quite contemporary with the original scribe. The facsimile given

in Plate IX. shows the upper part of the page containing John

-- 4. 42 5. 14. In col. 1, 1. 6, it will be seen that this MS. contains

the words " the Christ " ; and a reference to the Variorum Bible

C foot-note shows that it is supported by {i.e. the third corrector

L of C), D,  (with the later MSS.), while {<, B, C (with the Old

Latin, Vulgate, Bohairic, and Curetonian Syriac versions) omit

the words, and are followed by all the editors except M'^Clellan.

D Though and L represent pre-Syrian testimony, the balance of

that testimony, as contained in K, B, and the versions, overweighs

them.

More important readings will be seen in the second column,

which contains the story of the cure of the impotent man at the

pool of Bethesda. It will be seen (11. 13, 14) that an alteration has
been made in the MS., and that certain letters have been re-written

over an erasure, while others are added in the margin. The

words which are thus due to the corrector, and not to the original

scribe, are those which are translated " halt, withered, waiting for

A the moving of the ivater. For an angel of the Lord."       close
PLATE IX.
                                                                                                                   ^S
THE MANUSCEIPT8 OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 131

examination shows that the first and last parts of the passage origi-

nally occupied 1. 14, before the erasure ; but the words in italics are

an addition which was not in the original text. They are also

omitted {see the Variorum Bible foot-note) by Ji{, B, C, L, with

the Curetonian Syriac and the Sahidic versions. They are found

A only in D, the corrections of and C, and later MSS., and are

thus inevitably omitted by nearly all the editors. With regard

to verse 4 the distribution of evidence is different. It is omitted,

like the former words, by J^, B, C, the Curetonian Syriac, most
MSS. of the Bohairic and the Sahidic versions ; and these are now
joined by D, which in the previous case was on the other side.

On the other hand, A and L have changed in the contrary direc-

tion, and are found to support the verse, in company with C^, the

later uncials, and all cursives but three, the Old Latin and Vul-

gate, and the Peshitto Syriac. . Thus the versions are fairly equally

D divided ; but X, B, C,  form a very strong group of early

A authority, as against and the mass of later MSS. L and the Old

Latin are, in fact, the only witnesses to the verse which can be

considered as pre -Syrian, and consequently we find the Revised
Version omits the verse, in common with Tischendorf, Tregelles,
and Westcott and Hort ; Lachmami and M^Clellan alone appearing

on the other side.

Specimens of scribes' errors and their corrections may be seen in

11. 1, 2, 26-28. In the former the words first wiitten have been

erased, and the correct reading written above  them                           in the latter,
                                                                           ;

some words had been written twice over by mistake (Xeyu avru

deXsti ijyti^i yeveaSai Xeyei avTU deXeK; vytrit; yeveaOai a-KeKptOrj avru).

The whole passage (from the first yevsa-Oat) has been erased,
and then correctly re-^vritten, with a slight variation (Xeyet for

aireKiiiOfi) ; but as the Correct reading was much shorter than

that originally written, a considerable space is left blank, as the

facsimile shows.

As regards the quaHty of the text preserved in the Codex

Alexandrinus, it must be admitted that it does not stand quite so
high as its two predecessors in age, {< and B. Different parts of

                                                                              I2
 132 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

the New Testament have evidently been copied from different

A originals ; but in the Grospels, at any rate, is the oldest and most

pre-eminent example of that revised " Syrian " text which (to
 judge from the quotations in the Fathers) had become the
 predominant text as early as the fourth century. It will often
be found at the head of the great mass of later uncials and
 cursives which support the received text ; and although it is

                                                                                                                                                                                              "'

 much superior to the late cursives from which the " received text
 was in fact derived, it yet belongs to the same class, and will be

 found oftener in agreement with the Authorised Version than with
 the Revised. In the Acts and Epistles its text is predominantly
 Alexandrian, with some Western readings ; in the Apocalypse it
 belongs to the Neutral type, and is probably the best extant MS. of
 tiiat book. The Epistles of Clement, which are very valuable for
 the history of the early Church, having been written about the end

 of the first century, were until quite recently not known to exist in
 any other manuscript. The Eusebian sections and canons, referred

 to above (p. 124), are indicated in the margins of the Gospels,
 which also exhibit the earliest example of a division into chapters.

 A similar division of the Acts and Epistles, ascribed to Euthalius of

 Alexandria, who wrote about a.d. 458, is not found in this manu-
 script ; and this is an additional reason for believing it not to have

i been written later than the middle of the fifth century.

    The Codex Alexandrinus was the first of the greater manuscripts
 to be made accessible to scholars. The Epistles of Clement were
 published from it by Patrick Young in 1633, the Old Testament

 by Grabe in 1707-1720, and the New Testament by "Woide in

  1786. In 1816-28 the Rev. H. H. Baber published the Old
  Testament in type resembling as closely as possible the writing
  of the original. Finally a photographic reproduction of the
 whole MS. was published in 1879-1883, under the editorship of
 Mr. (now Sir) E. Maunde Thompson, the present Principal
  Librarian of the British Museum.

     B. Codex Vaticanus, the most ancient and most valuable of all
 the manuscripts of the Greek Bible. As its name shows, it is in
                                                              ;

THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 133

the great Vatican Library at Rome, which has been its home /

since about the year 1450 (certainly before 1475). There is,

therefore, no story to tell of the discovery of this MS. ; the interest

which attaches to its history is of a different kind, and relates to

the long struggle that was necessary before its contents were made

accessible to scholars. For some reason which does not clearly

appear, and which it is difficult to represent as very creditable to

the heads of the Roman Church, the authorities of the Vatican

Library put continual obstacles in the way of all who wished to

A study it in detail.  correspondent of Erasmus in 1533 sent that

scholar a number of selected readings from it, as proof of its

superiority to the received Greek text. In 1669 a collation (or

statement of its various readings) was made by Bartolocci, but it

was never published, and remained unknown until 1819. Other

imperfect collations were made about 1720 and 1780. Napoleon

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

carried the manuscript off as a prize of victory to Paris, where it 1

remained till 1815, when the many treasures of which he had

despoiled the libraries of the Continent were returned to their

respective owners. While at Paris it was studied by Hug, and its

great age and supreme importance were first fully made known

but after its return to Rome a period of seclusion set in. In 1843

Tischendorf, after waiting for several months, was allowed to see it

for six houi"s. Xext year De Miiralt was permitted to study it for

nine hour's. In 1845 the great English scholar Tregelles was allowed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;

indeed to see it but not to copy a word. His pockets were searched '

before he might open it, and all writing materials were taken

away. Two clerics stood beside him and snatched away the

volume if he looked too long at any passage ! However, the

Roman authorities now took the task in hand themselves, and in

1857 an edition by Cardinal Mai was published, which, however,

was so inaccurate as to be almost useless. In 1866 Tischendorf

once more applied for leave to edit the MS., but with difficulty

obtained leave to examine it for the purpose of collating difficult

passages. Unfortunately the great scholar so far forgot himself as

to copy out twenty pages in full, contrary to the conditions under
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ;

134 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

which he had been allowed access to the MS., and his permission
was naturally withdrawn. Renewed entreaty procured him six days
longer study, making in all fourteen days of three hours each ; and
by making the very most of his time Tischendorf was able in 1867
to publish the most perfect edition of the manuscript which had

yet appeared. An improved Roman edition appeared in 1868-81

but the final and decisive publication was reserved for the years
1889-90, when a complete photographic facsimile of the whole

MS. made its contents once and for all the common property of all

scholars.

   The Codex Vaticanus originally contained the entire Greek
Bible, but it has suffered not a little from the ravages of time.
The beginning has been lost, as far as Gen. 46. 28 ; in the middle,
Psalms 106-138 have dropped out ; at the end, the latter part of
Hebrews (from Chap. 9/4), the Catholic Epistles, and the whole of
the Apocalypse have disappeared.* Each page measures 10'^ by
10 inches. The vellum is beautifully fine, and is said to be made
from antelopes' skins. The writing (see Plate X.) is in small and
delicate uncials, perfectly simple and unadorned, with three
columns to the page. There are no enlarged initials, no stops or
accents, no divisions into chapters or sections such as are found in
later MSS., but a different system of division peculiar to this

manuscript. Unfortunately, the beauty of the original writing
has been spoilt by a later corrector, who, thinking perhaps that the
original ink was becoming faint, traced over every letter afresh,
omitting only those letters and words which he believed to be

incorrect. Thus it is only in the case of such words that we see

the original writing untouched and uninjured. An example may

be seen in the thirteenth and fourteenth lines from the bottom

   B * The Codex Vaticanus being deficient in the Apocalypse, the letter is in

the case of that book transferred to another MS. also in the Vatican, but much
later in date, being of the eighth century. It is of some importance, as uncial
MSS. of the Apocalypse are scarce ; but it must be remembered that its autho-
rity is by no means equal to that of the great manuscript to which the letter

B is elsewhere appropriated.
        THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 135

of the third column in our plate, where the corrector has not
retouched the words Kayu aTreo-reiXa avTovq t<; rov koo-ja-ov, which have
been written twice over by mistake. One scribe wrote the whole
of the MS., and was also, as we have seen, employed on part of
the Codex Sinaiticus. There are corrections by various hands, one

of them (indicated as W) beings ancient and valuable. With

regard to the date of the manuscript, critics are agreed in assign-
ing it to the fourth century ; and the identity of scribe between it
and part of ^< shows that they are practically contemporary, though

the more complete absence of ornamentation from B has generally

caused it to be regarded as slightly the older.

   Over the character of the text contained in B a most embittered

controversy has raged. It will have been noticed that it is only

within quite recent years that J^ and B have emerged from their

obscurity and have become generally known ; and it so happens
that these two most ancient manuscripts dififer markedly from the
class of text represented by A, which up to the time of their
appearance was held to be the oldest and best authority in
existence. Hence there has been a natural reluctance to abandon
the ancient readings at the bidding of these two new-comers,
imposing though their appearance may be ; and this is especially
the case since the publication of Dr. Hort's theory, which assigns
to these two manuscripts, and especially to B, a pre-eminence which
is almost overwhelming. Dean Burgon tilted desperately against
the text of Westcott and Hort, and even went so far as to argue
that these two documents owed their preservation, not to the

goodness of their text, but to its depravity, having been, so to
speak, pilloried as examples of what a copy of the Scripture ought
not to be ! In spit of the learning with which the Dean main-
tained his arguments, and of the support which equally eminent
but more moderate scholars such as Dr. Scrivener gave to his
conclusions, they have failed to hold their ground. Scholars in

general believe B to be the chief evidence for the most ancient
form of the New Testament text, and it is clear that the Eevisers

of our English Bible attached the greatest weight to its authority.
                                                                                               --;

136 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBTPTS.

Even where it stands alone, or almost alone, its evidence must be

treated with respect ; and such readings not unfrequently find a

place in the margin of the Eevised Version. One notable instance,

the omission of the last twelve verses of St. Mark, has been men-

tioned in speaking of the Codex Sinaiticus ; others will be found

recorded in the notes to the "Variorum Bible, or in any critical

edition of the Greek New Testament.

The page exhibited in our facsimile contains John 16. 27

17. 21. Six lines have been omitted from the top of the plate.

It was chosen especially as showing a good example of the

untouched writing of the MS., as described above ; but it also

contains several interesting readings. In 16. 27 it has "the
Father " instead of " God " : and the note in the Variorum Bible

informs us that B is here supported by the original text of C, and

D by and L. On the other hand, it is opposed by the original

text of 5< (both },{ and C have been altered by later correctors),

A and by and A. Most of the later MSS. follow the latter group

the versions and Fathers are divided. The evidence is thus very

evenly divided, and so, consequently, are the editors ; Tischendorf,
M<'Clellan, and "Weiss retaining the " received " reading, " God,"

while Lachmann, Tregelles, and "Westcott and Hort follow B. The

Eevisers have done the same, being probably influenced by the

fact that the evidence in support of the word "Father" comes

from more than one group of authorities, B and L being Neutral,

D Western, and C mixed, while the Coptic versions, which also

·support it, are Alexandrian. This is a good instance of an evenly

balanced choice of readings. In 16. 33 the received reading

D " shall have " is supported only by and the Latin versions, while

^{ A, B, C, and nearly all the other uncials and versions read

*' have "                                      so  that  practically all  editors  adopt  the  latter reading.
                                            ;

In 17. 11 another instance occurs of an overwhelming majority

in favour of a change, the received reading being supported only

D by a correction in and by the Vulgate, while j^, A, B, C, L, and

all editors read " keep them in thy name which thou hast given

me." In the next verse, K, B, C, D, L (all the best MSS. except A,
PLATE X.

                                i.^

                                M

                                                                            u4,

                                                      3 :i,         7 ^.·<          ^ -^ - * 7 r

                                                  o <T,i

                                                        ii t>

                                                  o - ·<

                                                            Lo^
                                                      'J '_ ,^ Or.

·-5 2 U * P i'/J                ^ 3 .>.!-                           >-7 9 y ? 2

                                        *.'  1-1

                                O

                                        << >->-L  *                 4 X'"* t u C 2
                                3 Lj-'Oto^(<;

                                                                              «i< it r^S Hi

                                                                               * - '^ ,- 7 3 h
                                                                              j;; 3 2 i 5 .t«<
                                                                               ~ o 2 " * f"

                                             2^ o ^'2 S r'3:s 3     =  0-5 5  * ?! " V'9'*'

vj s-x    x^ , o y ; 9 >--2 i                                                 t^ .9  2 w 2 <b
          - 3 2'-<'0,.4 O.i-OcC ,^ X ·< CO! O <f'i i *3'W t
0^0 <y

  § 2 z -    i  i;  ^  -·J^I
             '   -  2        "
.·~C 3*1^"*            >' ~  ^
                                f'S  C  i
                       U'-«
         7HE MANUSCEIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 137

and most of the versions) omit the words "in the world," which

A are found in and the mass of cursives. Of the editors, only

M^Clellan, prefemng what he regards as internal probability to
external evidence, retains the " received " reading. In the words
which follow, a more complicated difference of opinion exists, for
which reference may be made to the Variorum Bible note. One

A D reading is supported by and ; another by Ji{° (the third corrector

of ^) and the two chief Coptic versions ; a third by B, C, and L.
Of the editors, Lachmann adopts the first reading, M^Clellan the
second, and the others, including the Revisers, the third. None

of the variations here mentioned as occurring on this page of B

is of first-rate importance, but they furnish a fair example of the
sort of problems with which the textual critic has to deal, and of

the conflicting evidence of MSS. and the divergent opinions of

editors. Finally, in y. 15 (col. 3, 11. 19, 20 in the plate) there
is a good example of a class of error to which, as mentioned above

(p. 6), scribes were especially liable. The words to be copied
were " I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world,
but that thou shouldest keep them out of the evil " ; but when
the scribe had written the first " out of the," his eye wandered
on to the second occurrence of these words, and he proceeded to

write " evil " instead of " world," thus omitting several words,

and producing nonsense. The correction of the blunder has
involved the cancelling of some words in 1. 20 and the writing
of others in the margin. Sometimes the omission of words in
this way does not produce obvious nonsense, and then the error
may escajje notice and be perpetuated by being copied into other

manuscripts.

   C. Codex Ephraemi, now in the National Library of Paris,

having been brought from the East to Italy early in the sixteenth
century, and taken from Italy to Paris by Queen Catherine de'
Medici, This manuscript is a prominent instance of a fate which

befell many ancient books in the Middle Ages, before the inti'oduc-
tion of paper into Europe. When vellum became scarce, a scribe
who was unable to procure a sufficiency of it was apt to take some
 138 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

 manuscript to which he attached little value, wash or scrape off the
 ink as well as he could, and then write his book on the vellum thus
 partially cleaned. Manuscripts so treated are called palimpsests,
 from a Greek word implying the removal of the original writing.
 The Codex Ephraemi is a palimpsest, and derives its name from
 the fact that the later writing inscribed upon its vellum (probably
 in the twelfth century) consists of the works of St. Ephraem of
 Syria. Naturally to us the earlier writing in such a case is almost
 always the more valuable, as it certainly is in this case ; but it

 requires much labour and ingenuity, and often the application of

  chemicals, in order to discern the faded traces of the original ink.
 Attention was first called to the Biblical text underlying the works

 of St. Ephraem at the end of the seventeenth century. In 1716 a

 collation of the New Testament was made, at the instance of the

  great English scholar Richard Bentley ; but the first complete

 edition of it was due to the zeal and industry of Tischendorf, who
 published all that was decipherable, both of the Old and of the

 New Testament, in 184:3-5.

I

     The original manuscript contained the whole Greek Bible, but
  only scattered leaves of it were used by the scribe of St. Ephraem's
  works, and the rest was probably destroyed. Only 64 leaves

 are left of the Old Testament ; of the New Testament there are

  145 (out of 238), containing portions of every book except 2 Thes-
  salonians and 2 John. It is written in a medium-sized uncial

       ,

  hand, in pages measuring 12^ inches by 9| inches, and with only
  one column to the page. The Eusebian sections and the division
  into chapters appear in the Gospels, but there are no traces of
  divisions in the other books. The writing is generally agreed to
  be of the fifth century, perhaps a little later than the Codex
  Alexandrinus ; and two correctors have left their mark upon the
  text, the first in the sixth century, and the other in the ninth.
  Of course it will be understood, in reference to other manuscripts

  as well as this, that the readings of an early corrector may be as

  valuable as those of the manuscript itself, since they nmst have
I been taken from other copies then in existence.
PLATE XI.

           sy^

                t                            t

           ^

                -- Codex Ephraemi otii Cekt.

(Original size of -page, 121 in, x 9| fw.';  of part  reprodncerl                                                              1\ in.  x  9 in.)
                                                                                                                            ,
THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 139

   The great age of C makes it extremely valuable for the textual
criticism of the New Testament ; but it is less important than

those which we have hitherto described, owing to the fact that it
represents no one family of text, but is rather compounded from

them all. Its scribe, or the scribe of one of its immediate an-

cestors, must have had before him manuscripts representing all the

different families which have been described above. Sometimes it

agi*ees with the Neutral group of manuscripts, sometimes with the

Western, not unfrequently with the Alexandrian, and perhaps

oftenest with the Syrian. The page exhibited in Plate XI. con-

tains Matt. 20. 16-34 (eight lines being omitted from the bottom

of the page), and a reference to the notes in the Variorum Bible

will show that its readings here are of some interest. In ^'. 16
it is the chief authority for the words, "for many be called
but few chosen " ; in this case it is supported by D, but opposed
by {< and B, which omit the sentence (A is defective here).
Similarly in verses 22 and 23 the words, " and to be baptized with

the baptism that I am baptized with," are found in C, E, and a

multitude of later uncials and cursives, but are omitted by J<, B,
D, L, Z, and most of the versions. In all these cases the Revised

Version sides with J«{ and B against C, and there can be little
doubt that the Revisers are right, and that these readings of C

are due to the habit (very common in the Syrian type of text) of

introducing into the narrative of one Evangelist words and clauses

which occur in the description of the same or similar events in

the others.

D. Codex Bezae; in the University Library at Cambridge.

This is undoubtedly the most curious, though certainly not the

most trustworthy, manuscript of the New Testament at present

known to us. It was probably written in the south of France,
perhaps at Lyons. It was at Lyons in the year 1562, when

Theodore Beza, the disciple of Calvin and editor of the New

Testament (see p. 99), procured it, probably after the', sack of the

city by the  Huguenots  in  that  year                       and by Beza, from whom  it
                                                          ;

derives its name, it was presented in 1581 to the University of
140 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

Cambridge. It is remarkable as the first example of a copy of
the Bible in two languages ; for it contains both Greek and
Latin texts. It is also remarkable, as will be shown directly, on

account of the many curious additions to and variations from the

authentic text which it contains ; and no manuscript has been
the subject of so many speculations or the basis of so many con-

flicting theories. It was partially used by Stephanus in his

edition of 1550 and by Beza in his various editions. After its

acquisition by Cambridge it was collated, more or less imperfectly,

by various scholars in the 17th and 18th centuries, and published

A in full by Kipling in 1793.       new edition, with full annotations,

was issued by Dr. Scrivener in 1864 ; and since that date two

other Cambridge scholars, Professor Rendel Harris and Mr. Chase,

have made careful studies of its text from rather different points

of view.

In size the Codex Bezae is smaller than the manuscripts hitherto

described, its pages measuring ten inches by eight. The Creek

and Latin texts face one another on opposite pages, the Creek

being on the left hand, the Latin on the right. Each page con-
tains a single column, not written continuously, as in the MSS.

hitherto described, but in lines of varying length, the object

(imperfectly attained, it is true) being to make the pauses of sense

come at the end of a line. It is written in uncials of rather large

size, the Latin and Greek charactere being made curiously alike,

so that both pages have a similar general apjDearance at first
sight. The writing is evidently in a style later than that of

A or C, and it may be assigned with fair confidence to the sixth

century. The manuscript has been corrected by many hands,

including the original scribe himself ; some of the correctors
are nearly contemporary with the original writing, others are

much later.

The existence of a Latin text is sufficient proof by itself that

the manuscript was written in the West of Europe, where Latin

was the language of literature and daily life. In the East there

would     be  no  occasion  for  a  Latin  translation                                                but  in  the West
                                                                                                   ;
         THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 141

Latin was the language which woul^ be the most generally intel-

ligible, while the Greek was added because it was the original

language of the sacred books. But Latin copies of the Scriptures

existed  long  before  this  manuscript  was  written                                   and  then  the
                                                                                     ;

question arises, whether the scribe has simply copied a Greek

manuscript for his Greek pages and a Latin manuscript for his
Latin, or whether he has taken pains to make the two versions

cori'espond and represent the same readings of the original. On

this point a rather curious division of opinion has arisen. It is

tolerably clear that in the first instance independent Greek and

Latin texts were used as the authorities to be copied, but it is

also clear that the texts have been to some extent assimilated to

one another ; and while Dr. Scrivener (and most scholars until

recently) argues that the Latin has been altered to suit the Greek

(and therefore ceases to be very valuable evidence for the text of

the Old Latin version). Professor Rendel Harris maintains that

the Greek has been altered to suit the Latin, and that therefore it

is the Greek that is comparatively unimportant as evidence for

the original Greek text. Striking evidence can be produced on

both sides ; so that there seems to be nothing left but to conclude

that both texts have been modified, which is in itself not an un-

reasonable conclusion. The general result is that the evidence

of D, whether for the Greek or Latin texts, must be used with

some caution ; and care must be taken to make sure that any

apparent variation is not due to some modification introduced by

the scribe.

   But the special interest of Codex Bezae is not to be found so
much in verbal variations as in wider departures from the normal

text, in which there is no question of mere accommodations of

language, but which can only be due to a different tradition.

Codex Bezae, unlike the MSS. hitherto described, which are copies

of the entire Bible, contains only the Gospels and Acts, with a few

verses of the Catholic Epistles, which originally preceded the

Acts ; but in these portions of the New Testament it exhibits a

very remarkable series of variations from the usual text. It is the
142 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

chief representative of the Wfstern type of text, which, formerly

supposed to have originated in the West, is now shown to have

J come into existence in Syria or Asia Minor, at a very early date
       indeed, probably near the beginning of the second century. The

Church in Gaul {i.e. France) was closely connected with the Church

of Asia Minor, from which it had been founded ; and it may

have been in this way that this type of text passed from the East

(where it left its mark in the Old Syriac version) to the West,

where it became the predominant form in the early ages of the

Church. Its special characteristic, as explained above (p. 110),

is the free addition, and occasionally omission, of words, sentences,
and even incidents. One of these will be found in the page of

the MS. reproduced in our Plate XII., containing Luke 5. 38

-- 6. 9. The first word on the page shows that this manuscript

contains the last words of verse 38, " and both are preserved,"

which are omitted by K, B, and L, and after them by Tischendorf,

Westcott and Hort, and the Revised Version ; while A, C, and
the mass of later MSS. agree with D, and are followed by

Lachmann, Tregelles, and M^Clellan. Vei-se 39 is omitted

D altogether, both by  and by the Old Latin version {see note

in Variorum Bible). At the end of 6. 9 the words ol Se ia-tuicuv

D (" but they were silent ") are added by alone ; and in place of
D verse 5, alone inserts the following curious passage (11. 16-20 in

the plate) : " On the same day, seeing one working on the sabbath

day, he said unto him, Man, if thou knowest what thou doest,

blessed art thou ; but if thou knowest not, thou art accursed and

a transgressor of the law." This striking incident, which is con-

tained in no other manuscript or version, cannot be held to be

part of the original text of St. Luke; but it may well be that
it is a genuine tradition, one of the " many other things which

Jesus did" which were not written in the Gospels. If this be so,

one would forgive all the liberties taken by this manuscript with

the sacred text, for the sake of this addition to the recorded words

of the Lord.

It wiU be of interest to note some of the principal additions and
PLATE XII.

                u. ^

                21
                <o
                                - o<

                                .X-O

                      2li Sx £2
            ;Z  3 "^ 11/ i'<-<          Sis'
                                -, A *
                                        19

            i&oZi-^ - -^ n rr? : Z h< =21 i'-S t 7 * ^ V
                         - r, 5- ? Tr * ? 2 < ^i-s c r '-'^f h <

                                                                                                                                                                            =^

                                                                       >-Mp i5 u O ^ z J, _ ^ -

m

                                                                  'S.
         THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 143

omissions found elsewhere in this remarkable manuscript. After

D Matt. 20. 28, is the principal authority (being supported by one

uncial, 4>, the Old Latin and Old Syriac versions, and a few copies
of the Vulgate) for inserting another long passage : " But seek ye
to increase from that which is small, and to become less from that

which is greater. When ye enter into a house and are summoned

to dine, sit not down in the highest places, lest perchance a more
honourable man than thou shall come in afterwards, and he that
bade thee come and say to thee. Go down lower ; and thou shalt be
ashamed. But if thou sittest down in the worse place, and one
worse than thee come in afterwards, then he that bade thee will
say to thee. Go up higher ; and this shall be advantageous for thee."
Matt. 21. 44 ("and whosoever shall fall on this stone," etc.) is
omitted by D, one cursive (33), and the best copies of the Old

D Latin. In Luke 10. 42, and the Old Latin omit the words, " one

thing is needful, and." In Luke 22. 19, 20 the same authorities
and the Old Syriac omit the second mention of the cup in the in-
stitution of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, thus reversing the

D order of administration of the elements. In Luke 24. 6, and the

Old Latin omit the words " He is not here, but is risen" ; they omit

the whole of v. 12, with Peter's entry into the sepulchre ; they
omit in v. 36 " and saith unto them. Peace be unto you " ; the

whole of V. 40, " And when he had thus spoken, he showed them
his hands and his feet" ; in v. 51 the words "and was carried up
into heaven " ; and in v. 52 the words " worshipped him and."

In John 4. 9 the same authorities omit " for the Jews have no
dealings with the Samaritans " ; this time with the support of X.

D In Acts 15. 20 omits "and from things strangled," and adds

at the end of the verse " and that they should not do to others
what they would not have done to themselves." In the narrative
of St. Paul's missionary journeys in Asia, this manuscript and its
allies have so many variations as to have suggested the idea that
they represent a separate edition of the Acts, equally authentic
but different in date ; or else that they (or rather the source from
which they are descended) embody touches of local detail added by
144 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

a scribe who must have been a resident in the country and

acquainted with the local traditions. Little chano^es of phrase,
which the greatest living authority on the history and geography
of Asia Minor declares to be more true and vivid than the ordinary
text, are added to the narratives of St. Paul's visits to Lycaonia

D and Ephesus. Thus in ch. 19. 9, adds the detail that St. Paul

preached daily in the school of Tyrannus " from the fifth hour to
the tenth." In ch. 19. 1 the text runs thus, quite differently from

the verse which stands in our Bibles : " Now when Paul desired in

his own mind to journey to Jerusalem, the Spirit spake unto him
that he should turn back to Ephesus ; and passing through the
upper parts he cometh to Ephesus, and finding certain disciples he

said unto them." And when the evidence of D comes to an end,

as it does at 22. 29, the other authorities usually associated with
it continue to record a text differing equally remarkably from
that which is recorded in the vast majority of manuscripts and

versions.

   The instances which have been given are sufficient to show at
once the interest and the freedom characteristic of the Western
text, of which the Codex Bezae is the chief representative. It is
not, however, to be supposed that it is always so striking and so
independent. In many cases it is found in agreement with the

Neutral text of B and ^{, when it no doubt represents the authentic

words of the original. But space will not allow us to dwell too
long on any single manuscript, however interesting, and further
information as to its readings can always be found by a study of
any critical edition or of the notes to the Yarioram Bible.

    Dj. Codex Claromontanus ; in the National Library at Paris
(Plate XIII.). It has been said that the Codex Bezae contains
only the Gospels and Acts ; and consequently when we come to

D the Pauline Epistles the letter is given to another manuscript,

which contains only this part of the New Testament. Like the

Codex Bezae it formerly belonged to Beza, having been found at
Clermont (whence its name), in France, and in 1656 it was
bought for the Royal Library. Like the Codex Bezae, again, it
PLATE XIIT.

                                  <.\^

             ill":?-'-       -'^
                            ^ -7
              - 1^ - ~ - -

                                        i?-§

                ^ ^ 5-'^ 2 3 k !» Je

             i

                                                                                 ">

                                                         ^ ~ r 2 <-i -2 'ij;
                                                         - c  -
                                                         ><·

                                                         X ^ V' ** "^ 7"
                                                                 .:;

                                                                        '^riis^

             2 < J- ^ S"2
             5 ==?  S -2 -" 7w

                        L. < V rCCZ.s-
                                        r'-i^ 2-<.tt^l;
                    ^"tJ^Kmjt.
THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 145

contains both Greek and Latin texts, written on opposite pages.

Each leaf measures 9f inches by 7| inches, with very wide

margins. It is written on beautifully line vellum, in a very

D handsome style of writing, and (still like  of the Gospels) it

is arranged in lines of irregular length, corresponding to the

pauses in the sense. It is generally assigned to the sixth century,

and was probably written in Africa, perhaps in Egypt. The

Greek text is correctly written, the Latin has many blunders,

and is more independent of the Greek than is the case in Codex

Bezae, belonging to the African type of the Old Latin version.

It has been corrected by no less than nine different hands, the

fourth of which (about the ninth century) added the breathings

and accents, as they appear in the plate. The page shown con-

tains Eom. 7. 4-7. In verse G it has a reading different from
that usually found : " But now we have been discharged from

the law of death, wherein we were holden." The text of this

Codex is distinctly "Western, as might be expected from its

containing a Latin version ; but "Western readings in the Epistles
are not so striking as we have seen them to be in the Gospels

and Acts.

The remaining uncial manuscripts of the New Testament may,

and indeed must, be described more briefly ; but as they are

sometimes refeiTed to in the Variorum Bible, and of course oftener

in critical editions of the Greek, a short notice of them seems to

be necessary.

  E of the Gospels (Codex Basiliensis) is an eighth century copy

of the four Gospels, at Basle, in Switzerland, containing a good

representation of the Syrian type of text, so that it will often be

found siding with A.

  E of the Acts (Ea), the Codex Laudianus, is much more valu-

able, and is the most important Biblical MS. in the Bodleian

Library at Oxford. It is a manuscript of the sixth century,

containing both Latin and Greek texts, the Latin being on the

D left and the Greek on the right (unlike and Dg). It is written

in large rough uncials, in lines of varying length, but containing

S 2764.                                       K
U6 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

only one to three words each. Its text is Western, with a large

admixture of Alexandrian readings. The history of this volume is

An interesting.  inscription contained in it shows that it was in

Sardinia at some time in the seventh century. It was brought to

England probably by Theodore of Tarsus, Archbishop of Canter-

bury, in 668. It was probably deposited by him in one of the

great monasteries in the north of England, for it is practically

certain that it was used by Bede in wiiting his commentary on the

Acts. At the dissolution of the monasteries it must have been

turned loose on the world, like so many other treasures of inestim-

able value ; but ultimately it came into the hands of Archbishop
Laud, and was included by him, in 1636, in one of his splendid

gifts to the University of Oxford.

  E of the Pauline Epistles (E3) is merely a copy of D2, made at

the end of the ninth century, when the text of D2 had already

suffered damage from correctors. Hence it is of no independent

value.

Of the remaining manuscripts we shall notice only those which

have some special value or interest. Many of them consist of

fragments only, and their texts are for the most part less valu-

able. Most of them contain texts of the Syrian type, and are of

no more importance than the great mass of cursives. They prove

that the Syrian text was predominant in the Greek world, but

they do not prove that it is the most authentic form of the

text. Some of the later uncials, however, contain earlier

texts to a greater or less degree ; and these deserve a separate

mention.

   L (Codex Regius), in the National Library at Paris, is con-

spicuous among the later uncials for the antiquity of the text

which it preserves, and it was probably copied from a very early

manuscript. It is assigned to the eighth century, and contains

the Gospels complete, except for a few small lacunas. It has a
large number of Alexandrian readings (having in fact probably

been written in Egypt), but it is also in very great measure

Neutral in its character, and it is very frequently found in con-
THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 147

junction with B in readings which are now generally accepted as

the best. One notable case in which its evidence is of special

B interest is at the end of St. Mark's Gospel. Like       and }< it

breaks off at the end of v. 8 ; but unlike them it proceeds to give

two alternative endings. The second of these is the ordinary

vv. 9-20, but the first is a shorter one, which is also found in a
small number of minor authorities : " But they told to Peter and

his companions all the things that had been said unto them. And

after these things the Lord Jesus himself also, from morning even

until evening, sent forth by them the holy and imperishable pro-

clamation of eternal salvation." It is certain that this is not the

original ending of St. Mark's Gospel, but it is very probably an

early substitute for the true ending, which may have been lost

through some accident,* or else not written at all. In any case it

is interesting as showing the independent character of L and

increasing the general value of its testimony elsewhere.

P (Codex Guelpherl)ytaiius A) is a palimpsest of the sixth

century, containing 518 verses from various parts of all four

Gospels, over which have been written some of the works of Isidore

of Seville. It is now at "Wolfenbiittel in Germany. Its text is

partly Syrian, but contains some good readings.

   Q (Codex Guelpherbytanus B) is another palimpsest, of the fifth

century, containing 247 verses from St. Luke and St. John ; it

now forms part of the same volume as P, and its text is of the

same general character.

  R (Codex Nitriensis) is a palimpsest in the British Museum

(Add. MS. 17,211), where it may be seen exhibited in the same

case as the Codex Alexandrinus. It was brought from the convent

of St. Mary Deipara, in the Nitrian Desert of Egypt. It contains

51 G verses of St. Luke in a fine large hand of the sixth century,

   * Dr. Hort suggests that a leaf containing vv. 9-20 may have been lost from

an early copy of the second century ; but it must be observed that this implies
that the manuscript was -written in book form, which is very improbable at
that date. If it were a papyrus roll, as is most likely, the end would be in the
inside of the roll, and therefore not exposed to much risk of damage.

                                                               K2
148 OVR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

over which a Syriac treatise by Severus of Antioch has been
written in the eighth or ninth century. Its text is distinctly vahi-
able, and it contains a large proportion of pre-Syrian readings.

   T (Codex Borgianus), in the Propaganda at Rome, is peculiar

as containing both Greek and Coptic texts, the latter being of the
Thebaic or Sahidic version. It is only a fragment, or rather
several small fragments, containing 179 verses of St. Luke and
St. John. It is of the fifth century, and contains an almost en-
tirely Neutral text, with a few Alexandrian corrections. Dr. Hort

B ranks it next after and f^ for excellence of text. Several frag-

ments of other Grasco-Coptic MSS. have since been discovered of
lesser size and importance.

   Z (Codex Dublinensis) is a palimpsest, consisting of 32 leaves,
containing 295 verses of St. Matthew in writing of the sixth
or possibly the fifth century, over which some portions of Greek
Fathers were written in the tenth century. It was evidently
written in Egypt, in a very large and beautiful hand. Its text is

decidedly pre-Syrian, but it agrees with {< rather than with B.
   A, i.e. Delta, the fourth letter in the Greek alphabet (Codex

Sangallensis), is a nearly complete copy of the Gospels in Greek,
with a Latin translation between the lines, written in the ninth
century by an Irish scribe at the monastery of St. Gall in Switzer-
land. It was originally part of the same manuscript as G3 of the
Pauline Epistles. Its text, except in St. Mark, is of the ordinary

Syrian type and calls for no special notice, but in St. Mark it is
decidedly Neutral and Alexandrian, of the same type as L.

    2, i.e. Xi, the fourteenth letter of the Greek alphabet (Codex
ZacyntMus), is a palimpsest containing 342 verses of St. Luke,
written in. the eighth century, but covered in the thirteenth

with a lectionary. It is now in the library of the British and
Foreign Bible Society in London, whither it was brought from the
island of Zante in 1820. Its text belongs to the same class as L,
having a large number of Alexandrian readings, and also some of
Western type ; but its substratum is to a great extent Neutral, and
Dr. Hort places it next to T.
                                 i

PLATE XIV.

         \

          >

           o

     5^
        ^r!SltiSf|-rfsi^

       £4--
         THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 149

    Such is the roll of the most important uncial manuscripts of the

New Testament. Of the great crowd of cursive MSS., which run

A into hundreds and thousands, we do not propose to speak.                               few

of the most remarkable of them, which contain texts of an early

type, have been mentioned on p. 103 ; but for the most part they

do but reproduce, with less and less authority as they become later

in date, the prevailing Syrian type of text. No doubt good read-

ings may lurk here and there among them, but the chances against

it  are  many                              and  the  examination  of  them  belongs  to  the pro-
                                        ;

fessional student of Biblical criticism, and not to those who desire

only to know the most important of the authorities upon which

rests our knowledge of the Bible text. Only for completeness sake,

and as an example of the smaller form of writing prevalent in

Greek manuscripts from the ninth century to the fifteenth, is a

plate given here of one of these "cursive" MSS. (Plate XIV.).

The manuscript here reproduced was written in the year 1022, and

is now in the Arabrosian Library at Milan. It contains the

Gospels only, and its official designation in the list of New Testa-

ment MSS. is Evan. 348. The page of which the upper half is here

produced, on the same scale as the original, contains the beginning

of St. Mark's Gospel. Its text is of no special interest ; it is simply

an average specimen of the Greek Gospels current in the Middle

Ages, in the beautiful Greek writing of the eleventh century.

    The most important authorities for the text of the Greek

Testament have now been described in some detail ; and it is to

be hoped that the reader to whom the matter contained in these

pages is new will henceforth feel a livelier interest when he strolls

through the galleries of one of o^^r great libraries and sees the

opened pages of these ancient witnesses to the Word of God.

These are no common books, such as machinery turns out in

hundreds every day in these later times. Each one of them was

written by the personal labour and sanctified by the prayers of

some Egyptian or Syrian Christian of the early days, some Greek

or Latin Monk of the Middle Ages, working in the writing-room

of some great monastery of Eastern or Western Europe. Each
150 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT NANUSCRIPT8.

has its own individuality, which must be sought out by modern
scholars with patient toil and persevering study. And from the
comparison of all, from the weighing, and not counting merely, of
their testimony, slowly is being built up a purer and more accurate
representation of the text of our sacred books than our fathers and
our forefathers possessed, and we are brought nearer to the very
words which Evangelist and Apostle wrote, eighteen hundred years
or more ago.
                                            --

                  ( 151 )

                  CHAPTER VIII

THE ANCIENT VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

"TN this chapter we are like hunters who have beaten through

-*- the ground on which their game is chiefly expected to be

found, and then proceed to outlying covers and patches in which

they have good hope to find something which, though not equal to

Avhat they have already got, may yet add appreciably to the value

We of their bag.  go out into a wider territory. Not Greek alone,

-- but all the tongues of Pentecost the dwellers in Mesopotamia, in

Pontus and Asia, in Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and the

parts of Libya about Cyrene, sojourners in Rome, and Arabians

are now laid under contribution. We go to Syrian, and Egyptian,

and Roman, and ask them when the sacred Scriptures were trans-

lated into their language, and what information they can give us

as to the character and exact words of the Greek text from which

their translations were originally made. And the answer is that
the Word of God was delivered to the dwellers in these lands

several centuries before the date at which the oldest of our Greek

manuscripts were written. The Vatican and Sinaitic manuscripts

carry us back, as we have just seen, to about the middle of the

-- fourth century say, to a.d. 350. But the New Testament was

translated into Syriac and into Latin before a.d. 150, and into '^

Egyptian somewhere about a.d. 200 ; and the copies which we now

possess of these versions are lineal descendants of the original

translations made at these dates. The stream of textual tradition

was tapped at these points, far higher in its course than the

highest point at which we have access to the original Greek. If

we can ascertain with certainty what were the original words of the

Syriac or Latin translations, we can generally know what was the X

Greek text which the translator had before him : we know, that

is, what words were found in a Greek manuscript which was extant
152 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

in the first half of the second century, and which cannot have
been written very far from a.d. 100. Of course variations and
mistakes crept into the copies of these translations, just as they

did into the Greek manuscripts, and much skill and labour are
necessary to establish the true readings in these passages ; but we
have the satisfaction of knowing that we are working back at the
common object (the recovery of the original text of the Bible)
along an independent line ; and when many of these lines converge

on a single point, our confidence in the accuracy of our conclusions
is enormously increased.

            -- § 1. Eastern Versions.

The Gospel was first preached in the East, and we will therefore

take first the versions in the languages of those countries which

            lay nearest to Judaea, Of these, none can take

Versions*'  precedence of the Syriac version. Syriac, as has
            been already stated (p. 73), is the language of

Mesopotamia and Syria, and was likewise (with some variety of

dialect) the current language of every-day life in Palestine in the

time of our Lord. More than one translation of the Bible was

made into this language, and these will be described in order.

   (a) The Old or Cnretonian Syriac (distinguished as Cur. in the
Yariorum Bible). Our knowledge of this version is due entirely

to quite recent discoveries. Little more than fifty years ago its
very existence was unknown. Some acute critics had indeed

guessed that there must have been a version in Syriac older than

that which bears the name of the Peshitto (see belotv), but no

portion of it was known to exist. In 1842, however, a great mass
of Syriac manuscripts reached the British Museum from the

-- library of a monastery in the Nitrian Desert in Egypt, the result

of long negotiations with the monks by various travellers. Among

them was the palimpsest under whose Syriac text is the copy of

E the Greek Gospels known as (see p. 147), many copies of the

ordinary Syriac Bible, and other precious documents. But among

them also were some eighty leaves of a copy of the Gospels in
         8YEIAC VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 153

Syriac which Dr. Cureton, one of the officers of the Museum, re-
cognised as containing a completely different text from any manu-
script previously known. These leaves were edited by him, with a
preface in which he contended that in this version we have the very
words of our Lord's discourses, in the identical language in which
they were originally spoken. The manuscript itself (of which a fac-
simile may be seen in Plate XV.) is of the fifth century, practically
contemporary with the earliest manuscripts which we possess of
the Peshitto Syriac ; but Cureton argued that the character of the
translation showed that the original of his version (Avhich from the
name of its discoverer is often known as the Curetouian Syriac)
must have been made earlier than the original of the Peshitto, and
that, in fact, the Peshitto was a revision of the Old Syriac, just as
the Yuigate Latin was in part a revision of the Old Latin.

   On this point a hot controversy has raged. In calling this
version the Old Syriac, we have for the moment begged the

question, believing that the balance of evidence tends to support
this view ; but it is only fair to state that the opposite opinion

has been held by very high authorities. There is no question that
the Curetonian Sjrriac is less accurate, less scholarly, less smooth
than the Peshitto. There is also no doubt that the Peshitto was
eventually the Authorised Version among Syriac Christians, the
other being practically annihilated. The question is whether the

y^ Curetonian is a coiTuption of the Peshitto, or the Peshitto b,

revision of the Curetonian, or whether the connection between
them is something more remote and indirect. It is too technical
a controversy to be fully argued here, but in support of the view

that the Curetonian is the older text it may be maintained that if

an accurate version (such as the Peshitto) was in existence, it is
not likely that it would be deliberately altered so as to make it less
accurate, or that a less accurate independent version would be cir-
culated ; that the ultimate prevalence of the Peshitto is no proof
of its superior antiquity, any more than the ultimate prevalence of
the Vulgate proves it to be older than the Old Latin, but rather
the reverse ; and that the affinities of the Curetonian version are
154 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

with the older forms of the Greek text, while thosse of the Peshitto
are with its later forms. The Curetonian Syriac is found in
alliance with the Greek manuscripts B, {^, and D, rather than with

A or C. As has been shown above (p. 143) it is often found sup-
D portinoj the same readings as and the Old Latin, even where

these are most unlike all other authorities. In short, its text is
mainly Western, while the text of the Peshitto is mainly. Syrian,

A like that of and the majority of later MSS.

   Fresh light, however, has just been poured upon the subject by

A a new discovery, which will no doubt re-open the controversy.

new copy of the Old Syriac Gospels has been discovered, and its
text has been published while this book was being written. In
1892 two enterprising Cambridge ladies, Mrs. Lewis and her sister,
Mrs. Gibson, visited the Monastery of St. Catherine, on Mount
Sinai, the very place where Tischendorf made his celebrated dis-
covery of the Codex Sinaiticus, and where Prof. Rendel Harris had
quite recently found a Syriac copy of a very early Christian work,
hitherto supposed to be lost, the "Apology" of Aristides. These
ladies photographed a number of manuscripts, among them a
Syriac palimpsest which they had noticed as containing a Gospel
text ; and when they brought their photographs home, the under-
lying text of this palimpsest was recognised by two Cambridge
Orientalists, Mr. Burkitt and Prof. Bensly, as belonging to the
Old Syriac version, hitherto known only in the fragments of
Cureton. The palimpsest contains the greater part (about three-

fourths, the rest being undecipherable) of the four Gospels.
Naturally enough the announcement of the discovery aroused

much interest ; but Biblical students have had to possess their
souls in patience while another expedition was made to Sinai to
copy the MS. in full, and while the half obliterated writing was
being painfully deciphered and edited. The result is now before
the world, and though much discussion will be needed before a

settled conclusion can be reached, it is possible to indicate the

general bearings of the new discovery.
    It is clear, in the first place, that the Sinaitic MS. does not
                                          --

PLATE XV.

                                          -^-^u ^cvnij^ ^ar<^

                                                                                                        ifrr

          |T*T'" T^Orry V»^<^^

                                      CuKETONiAN Sybiac MS. 5tii Cent.

                            ( Original size of page. 111 in. x 9 r». ; without margins, as here,
                                                                           94 in. X 7j i«.)
                                                                                                                  ";

         SYRIAC VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 155

represent precisely the same text as the Curetonian. The diifer-
ences between them are much more marked than, say, between any
two manuscripts of the Peshitto or of the Greek Testament. One
striking proof of this may be found in the first chapter of St.
Matthew ; for whereas the Curetonian MS. emphasises the fact of
the Miraculous Conception, reading in i'. 16* "Jacob begat Joseph,
to whom was betrothed Mary the Virgin, who bare Jesus Christ
(thus" avoiding even the word " husband," which occurs in the
Greek), the Sinaitic MS. as emphatically denies it, reading "Jacob

begat Joseph, and Joseph, to whom was betrothed Mary the

Virgin, begat Jesus who is called Christ." Similar additions are
made elsewhere, and it is not surprising that some scholars have
beea eager to claim this as the original form of the narrative, the

story of the Divine Conception being (in their view) a later ex-

crescence. To the sober student, who tries to divest himself of
prejudice in either direction (and it must not be supposed that

all prejudice is on the side of orthodoxy), such a contention will
appear quite uncritical. It is true that the genealogy of our Lord
in Matt. 1. 1-16 was probably copied from a contemporary record,
and that in such a record our Lord would undoubtedly have been
described as the son of Joseph. But in any case the conclusion of
the document (with its reference to Mary and to the title of
" Christ ") has been altered when it was incorporated into the
Gospel, and the only question is whether it was incorporated in
the form in which it stands in the Sinaitic Syriac, or in that of

the Greek manuscripts and all other versions. And here the Sinai-

tic copy betrays itself ; for it contains several phrases which are

^ quite inconsistent with the denial of the Divine Conception. The

title " Mary the Virgiii " itself implies a comparatively late origin
and the phrase "before they came together," the quotation from
Isaiah referring to the Virgin Birth, and the narrative of Joseph's
doubts and behaviour are meaningless and unintelligible in con-
nection with the new reading in v. 16. In short, the Greek

      Plate XV. exhibits this portion of the Curetonian MS., the page containing
Matt. 1. U-23.
156 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

manuscripts give a consistent story of a miraculous event ; the

     Sinaitic Syriac gives an inconsistent story of what purports to be

; a natural event.

The interest naturally associated with so recent a discovery

perhaps justifies this longer discussion of a single passage ; but it

also has a direct bearing on our subject, because it helps to indicate

the position of the Old Syriac in the history of the Bible text. It

clearly belongs to an old family in the pedigree of texts, and the

Sinaitic MS. seems to contain it in" an earlier form than the

Curetonian, Besides the passage just discussed, it differs from

·^ the Curetonian in the important case of the last twelve verses of
   St. Mark. These are present in the Curetonian MS., but are

  omitted in the Sinaitic, which thus takes a place beside B and J^f,

~' which have hitherto stood alone in this omission. There are

several other interesting variants from the normal text, but there

is no room to discuss them here.

The general result (so far as first impressions go) would seem to

be that the Curetonian and Sinaitic texts represent two closely

allied branches of a common stock, each of them having been

somewhat considerably altered in the course of transmission, but

altered in different directions. The Sinaitic MS., or rather the

·> original from which it is descended, was probably made for one of

the early heretical bodies which held that our Lord was born in

the ordinary way, and that the Divine Spirit entered Him at

    His baptism ; while the Curetonian MS. represents an orthodox
^ revision of the same version. Although, then, there is no justi-

fication for the attempt to exalt the newly discovered palimpsest

into an authority superior to the oldest and best Greek manu-

scripts, the evidence of both the Curetonian and the Sinaitic MSS.

is of great value, on account of the date to which it carries us

back. Both contain an early type of text, and when the age of

the two manuscripts is remembered (the Curetonian being of the

fifth century, the Sinaitic not later, and perhaps slightly earlier),

it is evident that the common original from which they have

We branched off must be placed very early indeed.  seem, then, to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .

         SYEIAC VEBSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 157

have something of the same state of things as we shall find in the
case of the Latin versions, where we have a number of very early
texts collectively known as the Old Latin version, but differing
very widely among themselves ; the whole being finally superseded
by the new version of St. Jerome (partly revised, partly re-trans-
lated from the originals), which we know as the Vulgate. The

exact relation of this Curetonian-Sinaitic version to the Peshitto
still remains not absolutely clear. Cureton's belief that the

Peshitto is the result of a revision of his version is not shared by
the scholar who is engaged in editing the Peshitto, Mr. Grwilliam.

On the other hand he does not seem to have overthrown the view

that the Curetonian is (or is based upon) an older form of text
than the Peshitto ; and therefore we shall continue to call this
version, of which the Curetonian and Sinaitic manuscripts repre-
sent divergent modifications, by the convenient name of the Old

Syriac.

  -- {h) The Peshitto {Pesh. in Variorum Bible). This is the great

standard version of the ancient Syriac Church, made not later than
the third century (those scholars who hold it older than the Cure-
tonian would say the second), and certainly current and in general
use from the fourth century onwards. The name means " simple "
or "common," but the origin of it is unknown. It is known to us
in a much greater number of manuscripts than the Old Syriac, \
the total hitherto recorded being 177. Most of these, including '
the most ancient, formed part of the splendid collection of Syriac
MSS. from the Nitrian Desert to which allusion has already been
made (p. 152), and are now in the British Museum. Of some
of these, containing parts of the Old Testament, we have spoken

above (p. 74). Of those which contain the New Testament, two

are of the fifth century (the oldest being Add. MS. 14,459, in the
British Museum, containing the Gospels of St. Matthew and
St. Mark), and at least a dozen more are not later than the sixth
century, three of them bearing precise dates in the years 530-39,
534, and 548. The Peshitto was first printed by Widmanstadt, in
1555, from only two manuscripts, both of late date. It is now
     158 OVR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

     being re-edited by Mr. Gwilliam from some forty MSS., many of
      them of very early date, as shown above ; but so carefully were the

      later copies of the Peshitto made, between the fifth and twelfth
      centuries, that the substantial difference between these two editions
       is very slight.

         That the foundations of the Peshitto go back to a very early
      date is shown by the fact that it does not contain those books of

     the New Testament which were the last to be generally accepted.

? All copies of it omit 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, Jude, and the

      Apocalypse. It is a smooth, scholarly, accurate version, free and
      idiomatic, without being loose, and it is evidently taken from a
      Greek text of the Syrian family. Its relations with the old Syriac

     have been discussed above. It appears to be not so much a re-

      vision of it (at any rate as it appears in the Curetonian and
      Sinaitic MSS.) as a later version based in part upon it, but upon
     other materials as well. More than this it would not be safe to
     say until Syriac scholars have made up their minds on the subject
     more definitely and with a greater approach to unanimity than is

      at present the case.

         (c) The Philoxenian or Harkleian Syriac.^In the year 508,
     Philoxenus, Bishop of Mabug, in Eastern Syria, thinking the
      current Peshitto version did not represent the original Greek
      accurately enough, caused it to be revised throughout by one
      Polycarp ; and in a.d. 616 this version was itself revised, with
     the assistance of some Greek manuscripts in Alexandria, by
     Thomas of Harkel, himself also subsequently Bishop of Mabug.
     This version had practically escaped notice until 1730, when four

    copies of it were sent from the East to Dr. Eidley, of New College,

      Oxford, from which, after his death, an edition was printed by
     Prof. J. White in 1778-1803. It is now known to us in many
     more manuscripts, a total of 36 being recorded, of which half
     are in England. The best is said to be one in the Cambridge
      University Library, written in 1170, but a copy of the seventh
     century and another of the eighth century exist at Rome,
      another at Florence bears the date a.d. 757, and there are two of
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ;

         SYRIAC T^ESIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 150

the tenth century in the British Museum. The vereion is ex-
tremely literal, and follows the Greek with most servile exactness,
which has at least the advantage of making it quite certain what
form of words is being translated. The MSS. used by Thomas
of Harkel in his revision were evidently of the Western type,

but the text of the Philoxenian-Harkleian version as a whole is
of a very mixed description.

  -- {d) The Palestinian Syriac. There is yet another version of

the New Testament in Syi-iac, known to us only in fragments,

in a different dialect of Syriac from all the other versions. It
is believed to have been made in the fifth or sixth century, and
to have been used exclusively in Palestine. It was originally
discovered at the end of the last century by Adler in a Lectionary
(containing lessons from the Gospels only) in the Vatican Libi'ary,
and fully edited by Erizzo in 1861-4. Since then fragments of

the Gospels and Acts have come to light in the British Museum

and at St. Petersburg ; fragments of the Pauline Epistles in the
Bodleian and at Mount Sinai ; and two additional Lectionaries
have been found at the latter place by Mrs. Lewis, and will
shortly be edited by her. The text of this version is, on the
whole, of a Western type. Dr. Hort considers that it rests in part
on the Peshitto, but it is generally held to be quite independent,
and to be the result of a fresh translation from the Greek.

   This closes the list of Syriac Versions,* which rank among the

oldest and most interesting of all translations of the New Testa-
ment. From Syria and Mesopotamia we pass now to the neigh-

bouring country of Egypt.

   The history of the Coptic language, as it existed in Egypt at
the time when the Christian Scriptures were translated in that
country, has been told in a previous chapter (p. 75). There can be

    * Another Syriac version is sometimes enumerated, styled the Karka'phensian
but this is not a continuous vei'sion at all, but a collection of passages on which
annotations are made dealing with questions of spelling and pronunciation. It
is like the Massorah on the Hebrew Old Testament, and probably derives its
name from the monastery in which it was compiled.
IGO OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

no doubt that Christianity spread into Egypt at a very early date.
                          Alexandria, then the head-quarters of Greek

^^Vrr^ionr^  Hterature, possessed a large colony of Jews, by and

             for whom the Septuagint version of the Hebrew

Scriptures had been made ; and religious thought and philosophy

flourished among them. Apollos, the disciple of St. Paul, was a

Jew of Alexandria ; and the intercourse of Alexandria with

Palestine, with Syria, and with Asia Minor, made it inevitable that

the new religion should spread thither soon after it had over-leapt

the boundaries of Palestine itself. At what precise date the New

Testament books were translated into the native language of

Egypt we cannot tell. Some time would elapse before the faith

spread from the Greek-speaking population to the Coptic natives ;
some time more before oral teaching was superseded by written

    books. But by or soon after the end of the second century it is

/ probable that the Srst Coptic versions had been made. Our know-

    ledge of these versions is, for the most part, of quite recent growth,

and is growing still. Different dialects were spoken in different
parts of the country, and each of these came in course of time to
have its own version of the Scriptures. Until recently only two
of these versions were known ; we are now acquainted, more or
less, with five, and it is not improbable that the discoveries which
come in so thickly upon us from Egypt Avill increase this number

in the near future.

   {a) The MempMtic or Bohairic Version {Memph. in Variorum
Bible) was the version current in Lower {i.e. Northern) Egypt, of

which the principal native town was Memphis. Originally, how-

ever, the dialect in which it is written belonged only to the coast

district near Alexandria, and another dialect was in use in Mem-

phis itself ; hence it is better to avoid the term Memphitic, and
use the more strictly accurate name Bohairic. This was the most

developed and most literary dialect of the Egyptian language,

and ultimately spread up the country and superseded all the other

dialects. The consequence of this is that the Bohairic is the
Coptic of to-day, so far as the language still exists, and that in
PLATE XVI.

                                                           BcirAiRic M."".--A.D. 1208.
                   (Original size of faf/e, 134 in. x 10 m. ; of lart reprodvced, Sj j«. x G t».)
COPTIC VERSIONS OF THE KEW TESTAMENT. IGl

the Bohairic dialect alone are complete copies of the New Testa-

ment still extant. All the other Coptic versions exist in fragments

only.

   The Bohairic version was first made known by some Oxford

scholars S^ the end of the seventeenth century, and the first printed

edition of it was published at Oxford by Wilkins in 17 IG.

Neither in this nor in any subsequent edition has sufficient use

been made of the manuscripts available for comparison, and a good
edition is still required, a want which is now in course of being

supplied by the Rev. G. Horner, of Oxford. Over a hundred

manuscripts exist and have been examined, but none of them is of

a very early date. The oldest and best is a MS. of the Gospels at

Oxford, which is dated a.d.  1173-4                                    there is one at  Paris dated  in
                                                                    ;

1178-80; there is another, in the British Museum, of the year

1192 ; others are of the thirteenth and later centuries. There is

indeed a single leaf of the Epistle to the Ephesians which may be

as early as the fifth century (in the British Museum), but this

exception is too small to be important. The Apocalypse was not
originally included in this version, and we know that in the third

century its authenticity was questioned in Egypt. The translation

is generally good and careful, so that it is easy to see what was the
Greek which the translator had before him in any particular

passage. The text, too, is of an excellent type. Excluding passages

which appear only in the later MSS., and which evidently were not

in the original version, the Bohairic text is mainly of a Neutral or

Alexandrian type, with not much mixture of "Western readings,

and little or nothing of Syrian. The doubt about the last twelve
verses of St. Mark appears in the best MS., which gives the

shorter alternative ending (as in L, see p. 147) in the margin.

Otherwise all the Bohairic MSS. have the usual verses 9-20. The

-- passage John 7. 53 8. 11 is omitted by all the best MSS. The

pureness of the text is another argument in favour of this version
having been made at an early date.

   The specimen here given (Plate XVI.) is taken from a manu-

script in the British Museum (MS. Or. 1315) which was written in

s a7«4.                                                                                 L
                                                --

162 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPT8.

the year 1208. It affords an average specimen of Coptic writing
of this period, and of the form of ornamentation (copied from
Byzantine MSS.) which is sometimes found in them. The page
here given (five lines being omitted from the bottom, and the

whole being much reduced in scale) contains the beginning of
St. Mark. In the margin, which is not shown in the plate, is an
Arabic version of the Gosj^els. Such versions are a common ac-
companiment of Coptic MSS., and are no doubt due to the fact
that Coptic has gradually become a dead language, Arabic alone
being understood. At the present day there is a tendency to

substitute Arabic for Coptic in the services of the Church.
    {h) The Thebaic or Sahidic Version {Theh. in Variorum Bible).

Again, Thebaic is the older name, Sahidic the more accurate. This
is the version which was current in Upper {i.e. Southern) Egypt, of
which the chief town was Thebes, Its existence was not noticed
until the end of the eighteenth century, and the first printed
edition was that of Woide, published at Oxford, after his death, in
1799. Since that date our knowledge of the Sahidic version has
enormously increased, and a uew edition of it is urgently required.
It exists only in fragments, but these fragments are now very
numerous indeed, especially at Paris, and when put together they

would compose a nearly complete New Testament, with consider-
able portions of the Old. Many of the fragments are of very early

date, going back to the fifth, or possibly even the fourth century
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;

but the dating of Coptic ]\ISS. is a very difficult task. The
original translation, however, was probably made somewhat later

than the Bohairic version, as is only natural, since Christianity
was first introduced into Lower Egypt, and thence spread up the

Kile into Upper Egypt. As in the Bohairic, the Apocalypse seems

originally to have formed no part of the New Testament. The

translation is somewhat less faithful than the Bohairic, the lan-
guage rougher and less polished. The text also is less pure,
including a considerable Western element, so that it must have
been translated independently from the Greek, and from manu-
scripts belonging to the "Western family. Thus it is reckoned by
PLATE XVII.

                                        M 'M ·' · IY*^'r»4 ^Xf

                                        f

                                        TF'I MfOOV'^5^'^.

ayt mvr^ cAft if                        ·I KiTuyri.ifF«M

                                        M , V, r 1 1 Kf A' FA K^n f

                                        ,A^F^4nMoyor-rK'

                                        M A'^A A ^ A i oyj'l
                                        l*'MMoVM K^a^

o ^ |L OjY Nl M' f Kl A*ilf^            VA M n F?o oyxT F Kl ^I^'M

                                        1' j'O <Ui FO  ^^t^

rf '         'f*^^''^ *^^'^V '    '^'»  MVJ '^FA MT4F^oVCI

                                '       KA A r F M I" TAAM
                                        M HTM M I'MotF
TM MM rT'Kl?MU''
                                        -IlvfTM'rMVTMFP-
6eovM F'rAi:*rt»i                        K'Air-APFKieATF
                                        -n Ivi^» »^ ^ H'T^
         F-v;r ···Ti>iri^|':*i-
                                         PArTiAFMirrMM
V iTf^FAi-MirriaMF
                                         nAiVeiiFT^Fi^H

                                        ^-FMnr"rTFq«Y ^

ixTf- r K A>^^r Fi rial

                                          ·^T>IA'^rAKT&^>J ·· t^

                                    /

             -- Sauidic My. oTii Cent. (?)

                        (Origmal size.)
         COPTIC VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 163

Dr. Hort as a not imfrequent ally of the chief representatives of
that form of the test, the Codex Bezae (D), and the Old Latin and
Old Syriac versions.

   The specimen shown in our Plate XYII. is selected mainly on
the ground of its age. It is probably one of the oldest extant

fragments of the Sahidic New Testament, having perhaps been
written in the fifth century. It is now in the British Museum

(MS. Or. 4717 (10) ). Unfortunately, it is only a fragment con-
sisting of four pages. The page exhibited, which is reproduced

in its original size, contains 2 Thess. 3. 2-11. No imjwrtant

variations of reading occur in this passage.

   The remaining Coptic versions may be dismissed very briefly.
They have only recently been discovered, they are known as yet

only in a few fragments, and their characteristics cannot yet be
said to be established. Hence they have not yet made their

appearance in critical editions of the New Testament, and may for

the present be disregarded. They are {c) the Fayynmic, or version
current in the district of the Fayyum, west of the Nile and south
of the Delta, from which an enormous number of Greek and Coptic
papyri have reached Europe in recent years. It appears to be
related to the Sahidic, being probably descended from an early
form of the same version, (d) The Middle Egyptian, found in
manuscripts from the region of Memphis, related, like the Fayyumic,
to the Sahidic. (e) The Akhmimic, found in a number of fragments
from the neighbourhood of Akhmim, the ancient Panopolis, from
which also came the manuscript containing the extraordinarily
interesting portions of the apocryphal Gospel and Revelation of
Peter which were published in 1892. This is said to be the
earliest dialect of the Coptic language, but at present only a few

small fragments of the New Testament have been published, the

first to appear being the discovery of Mr. "W. E. Crum. It is as
certain as such speculations can be, that our knowledge of the
Egyptian versions will be very greatly increased within the next
few years. Materials are rapidly coming to light, and scholars
competent to deal with them are now not wanting. Meanwhile we

                                                                               L2
164 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIEXT MANUSCRIPTS.

must be thankful for the high character of the versions which
are already available for the criticism and restoration of the

sacred text.

    The remaining Oriental versions of the New Testament may bo

dismissed with a very short notice. Their evidence may sometimes

be called into court, but it is seldom of much importance.

    The Armenian version, as w^e have it now, dates from the fifth

century. Up to about the year 390 Armenia, the countiy to the

east of Asia ]\Iinor and north of Mesopotamia, lying between the

Roman and Persian empires, possessed no version of its own ; but

between that date and a.d. 400 translations of both Old and

New Testaments were made, partly from Cfreek and partly from

Syriac. About the year 433 these translations were revised with

the help of Greek manuscripts brought from Constantinople. The

result was the existing Armenian version, which consequently has,

as might be expected, a very mixed kind of text. One very in-

teresting piece of evidence has, however, been preserved in an

Armenian manuscript. Most of the oldest MSS. of the Gospels

in  this  version  omit  the  last  tw^elve  verses  of  St.  Mark                             but  one
                                                                                            ;

of them, wi'itten in the year 989, contains them, with a heading

7 stating that they are "of the Elder Aristion."* Aristion lived in

the first century, and is mentioned by Papias, his younger contem-

porary, as having been a disciple of the Lord. If the tradition

which assigns to him the authorship of Mark 16. 9-20 may be

accepted, it will clear up the doubts surrounding that passage in

a satisfactory way. It will show that St. Mark's Gospel was left

unfinished, or was mutilated at a very early date, and that a sum-

mary of the events following the Resurrection, written by Aristion,

was inserted to fill the gap ; and we gain the evidence of another
witness of our Lord's life on earth. The earliest MS. of the

Armenian Gospels is dated in the year 887 ; there are probably
two others of the ninth century and six of the tenth. The rest of

   * The credit of this discovery belongs to Mr. F. C. Conybeare, of University

College, Oxford.
        EASTERN VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 165

the New Testament is only found in copies containing the whole

 Bible, which are rare and never older than the twelfth century.
    The Gothic version, as has already been stated (p. 77), was

made for the Goths in the fourth century, while they were settled
in Masia, before they oven-an Western Europe. It was made by
their Bishop Ulfilas, and was translated directly from the Greek.

We know it now only in fragments, more than half of the Gospels

being preserved in a magnificent manuscript at Upsala, in Sweden,
written (in the fifth or sixth century) in letters of gold and silver

upon purple vellum. Some portions of the Epistles of St. Paul
are preserved in palimpsest fragments at Milan ; but the Acts,
Catholic Epistles, and Apocalypse are entirely lost. The Greek
text used by Ulfilas seems to have been of the Syrian type in the

New Testament, just as it was of Syrian (Lucianic) type in the

Old.

    The Ethiopic version belongs to the country of Abyssinia, and
was probably made about the year 600 ; but most of the existing
manuscripts (of which there are over a hundred) are as late as the
seventeenth century, only a few going back as early as the fifteenth,

the oldest of all (at Paris) being of the thirteenth century. Little

is known about the character of the text, as it has never been

critically edited.

   Several Arabic versions are known to exist, some being trans-
lations from the Greek, some from Syriac, and some from Coptic,
while others are revisions based upon some or all of these. None
is earlier than the seventh century, perhaps none so early ; and
for critical purposes none is of any value.

    Other Oriental versions (Georgian, Slavonic, Persian) are of still

later date, and may be ignored.

              -- § 2. The Western Versions.

  We now pass to the Western world, and trace the histoiy of the

New Testament as it spread from its obscure home in Palestine to

the gi'eat capital of the world, and to the countries in its neigh-
bourhood which owned its sway and spoke its language. In
166 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS..

speaking of the Latin Bible we are at once taking a great step

nearer home ; for Latin was the literary language of our oavii fore-

fatiiers, and the Latin Bible was for centuries the official Bible of

our own country. Nay, more, it was from the Latin Bible that

the first English Bibles were translated. Therefore we have a

special interest in the history of this version, an interest which is

still further increased by the remarkable character which it pos-

sessed in its earlier stages, and by the minuteness with which we

We are able to trace its fortunes in later days.                                                                            have already

described the Latin versions in relation to the Old Testament ; we

have now to speak of them in relation to the New.

In the Old Testament we have seen that there are two Latin

versions, known  as  the  Old Latin  and the Vulgate                                                                        and we have
                                                                                                                         ;

seen that of these the Vulgate is the more important as an aid to

the recovery of the original Hebrew text, because it was translated

y directly from the Hebrew, while the Old Latin was translated from

the Septuagint ; and also because the Vulgate is complete, while

the Old Latin has only come down to us in fragments. In respect

of the New Testament the relative importance of the two is some-

what different. Here we possess both versions practically com-

plete : and whereas the Old Latin Avas translated direct from the

original Greek, the Vulgate was only a revision of the Old Latin.

Moreover, we possess a few manuscripts of the original Greek

which are as early as the Vulgate ; but the Old Latin was made

long before any of our manuscripts were written, and takes us

back almost to within a generation of the time at which the sacred

books were themselves composed.

The Old Latin Version is consequently one of the most valuable

and interesting evidences which we possess for the condition of the

New Testament text in the earliest times. It has already been

? said (p. 78) that it was originally made in the second century,

perhaps not very far from a.d. 150, and probably, though not

certainly, in Africa. Another version, apparently independent,

subsequently appeared in Europe ; and the divergencies between

these rival translations, as well as the extensive variations of text
PLATE XVIII.

                          itrjfCuoMTscc

              UITUOMSLIS

                          n>\5T|5TCKfU:

g rc\ss>\]S^f^)u: """'--l^it^rsTiscftu^

                                 NIXO^cCOAa^CO
                                i

                          W C! Xi>OKc>t XT JIC

                              }K{^C*^4^^LW

                        -- Codex Yercellensis ixH Cekt.

              (Original size of imge, %\iv. x 6| in.; withmit margins, as here,
                                                        7i in. X 4i ew.)
     LATIN VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 1G7

which found their way into both, made a revision necessary, which

was actually produced in Italy in the fourth century. Hence it is

that three different families or groups can be traced, the African,

We the European, and the Italian.  are able to identify these

several families by means of the quotations which occur in the

writings of the Latin Fathers. Thus the quotations of Cyprian,

who  died  in  258,  give  us  a  representation  of  the  African  text
                                                                                      ;

the European text is found in the Latin version of the works

of Irenseus by Rufinus, who died in 397 ; while the Italian text
appears conspicuously in Augustine (a.d. 354-430). By the

help of such evidence as this we can identify the texts which are

found in the various manuscripts of the Old Latin which have

come down to us.

Owing to the fact that the Villgate eventually superseded the

Old Latin as the Bible of the "Western Church, manuscripts of the

latter are scarce, but when they exist are generally very old. No

copy contains the whole of the New Testament, and very few are

perfect even in the books which they contain. Thirty-eight

manuscripts of the Old Latin exist ; of these, twenty-eight contain

the Gospels, four the Acts, five the Catholic Epistles, eight the

Pauline Epistles, and thfee the Apocalypse, of which a practically

complete text is also preserved to lis in the cotnmentary of Prima-

sius, an African Father of the sixth century. Manuscripts of the

U^ Old Latin are indicated in critical editions by the small italic

letters of the alphabet. One of the oldest and best is the Codex

Vercellensis («), of which a facsimile is given in Plate XYIII.
It contains the four Gospels, in the order usual in the Western

Church, namely, Matthew, John, Luke, Mark. It is written in

silver letters, in very naiTow columns, on extremely thin vellum

stained with purple. The passage shown in the Plate is John 16.

23-30. In verse 25 this MS. has a curious reading, which is

found nowhere else ; instead of " Ye shall ask in my name ; and

I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you," it has

"ask in my name, and I will pray for you." The passage may be

seen at the top of the second column : " in nomine meo petite et
168 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBFPTS.

ego rogabo propter vos," the words " et ego " being added above
the line. This manuscript was written in the fourth century, and
is consequently as old as the oldest Greek MSS. of the Bible. It
is now at Yercelli in Italy.

   Other important MSS. of the old Latin are, for the Gospels, the
Codex Veronensis (/>), of the fourth or fifth century, one of the
most valuable of all ; Codex Colbertinus (c), an extraordinarily
late copy, having been written in the twelfth century, in Langue-
doc, where the tradition of the Old Latin text lingered very late,
but containing a good text ; Codex Palathstus (e), fourth or

fifth century, very incomplete, containing a distinctly African type

of text : Codex Brixianus (/), sixth century, with an Italian
text ; Codex Bobiensis (^), fifth or sixth century, containing a
very early form of the African text ; the Latin text of the Codex

Bez^ {d), for which see p. 139. In the Acts, there are Codex
Bez^ (f?),as before; the Latin text of the Codex Laudianus (^),

see p. 145 ; Codex Gigas (//), of the thirteenth century, the
largest manuscript in the world, containing the Acts and Apoca-
lypse in the Old Latin version, the rest in the Vulgate ; and some
palimpsest fragments {h and s) of the fifth or sixth century. The

Catholic Epistles are very imperfectly represented, being contained

only in the Codex Corbeiensis, of St. James {ff), of the tenth
century, and portions of the other epistles in other fragmentary
MSS. The Pauline Epistles are known in the Latin version of
the Codex Claromontanus {d), for which see p. 144 ; e,/, g are
similarly Latin versions of other bilingual manuscripts ; and the re-

m maining authorities are fragments. The Apocalypse exists only in

of the Gospels and g and h of the Acts. It must be remembered,
however, that these MSS. are supplemented by the quotations in
Latin Fathers, which are very numerous, and which show what
sort of text each of them had before him when he wrote.

    It may be interesting to mention which manuscripts represent
the various families of the Old Latin text. The African text is
found in Tc and (in a somewhat later form) e of the Gospels, h of

the Acts and Apocalypse, in Primasius on the Apocalypse, and in
         LATIN VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 169

Cyprian generally. The Italian text, which is the latest of the

three, appears in /and q of the Gospels, q of the Catholic Epistles,
r of the Panline Epistles, and in Augustine. The remaining MSS.

liave, on the whole, European texts {l being an especially good

example), but many of them are mixed and indeterminate in

character, and some have been modified by the incorporation of

readings from the "Vulgate.

   It has been said above (p. 107) that the Old Latin version
testifies to a type of Greek text of the class which has been de-

scribed as " Western." This applies especially to the African and

European groups of the Old Latin ; the Italian tex't being
evidently due to a revision of these with the help of Greek copies

of a Syrian type. The earlier forms of the Old Latin, however,

are distinctly Western, as has been shown in describing the peculiar

readings of this class of text ; and since the original translation

into Latin was made in the second century, and perhaps early in

that century, it shows how soon considerable corruptions had been

introduced into the text of the New Testament. It is, indeed,

especially in the earliest period of the history of the text that such

interpolations as those we have mentioned can be introduced. At

that time the books of the New Testament had not come to be

regarded as on a level with those of the Old, They were precious

as a nan-ative of all-important facts ; but there Avas no sense of
obligation to keep their language free from all change, and addi-

tions or alterations might be made without much scruple. Hence

arose the class of manuscripts of which the Old Latin version is

one of the most important representatives.

 -- The Vulgate. The history of this version has already been

narrated in connection with the Old Testament. It was in the

year 382 that Pope Damasus entrusted Jerome with the task of

producing an authoritative revision of the Latin Bible wliich

should supersede the innumerable conflicting copies then in exist-

A ence.  settled version of the Gospels was naturally regarded as

the prime need, and this was the first part of the work to be

A undertaken. Jerome began cautiously.  wholly new version of
170 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

the familiar text would have provoked much opposition, and
Jerome consequently contented himself, as Damasus had intended,
with merely revising the existing Old Latin translation. He
compared it with some ancient Greek manuscripts, and only made

alterations where they were absolutely necessary to secure the true
Sense of a passage. Minor corrections, though in themselves
certain, he refrained from introducing, in order that the total

change might be as little as possible. The Gospels Were completed

in 384, and the rest of the New Testament, revised after the same

manner, but still more slightly, probably appeared in the following
year. The Old Testament, which, as we have seen, was an alto-
gether new translation from the Hebrew, Was not finished until
twenty years after this date.

   The New Testament was consequently a distinct work from the

Old, and was made on a different principle. It was based on the
"Itahan" type of the Old Latin, from which it differs less than the
Italian differs from the primitive " African " text. The revision
which produced the Italian text consisted largely, as we have seen,
in the introduction of Syrian readings into a teit which was
mainly Western in character. Jerome's revision removed many of
the Syrian interpolations, but still left the Vulgate a mixed
Western and Syrian text. Its evidence is, consequently, of less
Value than that of the earlier Versions ; but it must be remem-
bered that all the authorities used by Jerome in the production of
the Vulgate must have been as old as, or older than, the oldest
manuscripts which we now possess.

    Manuscripts of the Vulgate are countless. There is no great
library in Western Europe which does not possess them by scores
 and by hundreds. After existing side by side with the Old Latin
 Version for some centuries it became universally adopted as the
 Bible of Western Christendom, and was copied repeatedly in every
 monastery and school until the invention of printing. Hence
 when we come now to try to recover the original text of the
 Vulgate, we are confronted with a task at least as hard as that of
 recovering the original text of the Greek Bible itself. It is
PLATE XIX.

     quix iJwpoTesTxxeeTuiRTUTe'             etuiOiT<>uxs'Nxues.sTVNTes
       KnpeRXTSpi R ITI BUS
                                                SeCUSSTXqNUtX^
      InooumOis eKaceuNT                    pisc« oRcs xuTeoo OusceNOe

»|xin iNpa.^>Neir>l,ocu<.T)R©e;iows            RXNTeiHtixpxNT Rerix
                                             xsceNOeNS xuTea> isciNXtt")
       aii9eNS\uTt\inOesYNXqocx
                                               Nxucv4> quxeeuxT
.·)|J>
                                                SICDONIS
      - INTRO lU IT INdOOXKtl SH"i")dNr
                                             RocxuiTXUTexi^ xrcr^ux
                ;
                                                Re<><.iceRe pusiLLua^
    socRas xyrecn simoNis
                                            eTsei>fcis!S OocenxT
        TeisienxTUR vDXcivis peBRiB*           OeNXUICuLxTURBXS .
  ^ eTRocxcieRUNTilluvt^pRoex
                                         ^f^iroessxaiT \.uTecD Ipquf
   . ersTwissupeRiUA<.i> iwpeRX
        uiT fzeBRi eT<>!or»»snT iLUa)>   "**"

  ">1VONTINUOSUR9e!«S                           ClXITX6Sia>ONO<-V>
        OnHNISTRMXXT iLUs
                                             (Njc iN'xL:iiUL«> eilxxjCi^eiTX
    CucnscAjkurecn oO^disseT
    oa>>jes quiKuseuxNTiNpR                    ueiTR^lNCXprURMT^
                                            eTRespONdeNs SKT>e»s
        o^os tixai»Lx.vt^oRrBus
                                                 C»lXITlU4,
    , ©ucetUNT iLLos x^euw
                                            pRxecepxoR pefiTOTXio
    XTlLLesiN^uJjS QUNtJS SCi^^O               NocTeir> LXBORXNTes
  . NCNS OURXBXreoS '
 :gxiei5iXNf CTIMTNOXetnoNIX                    fsjibiLocpuTHis*

       xv^>ul:9Sict^«>XNTlxeT&L             IN ueRKo .\uTen>TUo
                                               Iaxxbor^^u:
      GCNTix quivmes ciUusoi
   exiNo^pwa »«H)i!jisiNeB\T                excuo^ hoc peciss«<rr

                                               cxM^dLuscRur^ p»s<;"> juoj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .

                                               iTKiLrrruOiNea^ «^ioiv\o>
                                          . RUCi>peox.TUR\uTaoReTeeoR'"

± ; . ~-    '/.                          .^^L:

                 -- Codex Amfatinus Circ> a.d. 7lo.

{Original size of page, 19^ in. x 185 Mi.; of part reproduced, 85 mj. x XO^in.)
LATIN VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 171

believed that over 8000 manuscripts exist in Europe, and the ti

majority of these have never been fully examined-* It is only

known that the text has been very considerably corrupted, partly

by intermixture with the Old Latin version during the time when

both translations were simultaneously in use, partly by the natural

accidents attending the text of any book which has been repeatedly

We copied.  shall see in the next chapter what attempts were

made to correct it during the Middle Ages. In modern times no

critical edition has yet been produced. Our great English scholar,

Richard Bentley, examined and caused to be examined a consider-

able number of manuscripts, but never advanced so far as to form

a revised text of any part of the Bible. Now at last the task has

been seriously taken in hand, and this very year has witnessed the

completion of an edition of the four Gospels by Bishop Words- ^
Avorth of Salisbury and the Rev. H. J. White. This edition is

based upon a complete examination of o\'er thirty of the best

manuscripts, with occasional references to many others, and is the

first truly critical edition of the Vulgate that has ever been pub-

lished. It is sincerely to be hoped that, in due course of time,

the same accomplished editors may give us the rest of the Vulgate

in an equally satisfactory form.

The best manuscript of the Vulgate is the CcrDEX_ AmIATinus, I

of which a reduced facsimile, showing the lower half of the page, is

given in Plate XIX. This has a special interest for Englishmen,

apart from the value of the text contained in it, as having been pro-

duced in England (possibly by an Italian scribe) at the beginning of

the eighth century. Its English origin was only discovered eight

years ago, and in a curious way. On its second page is an inscription

stating that it was presented to the abbey of Monte Amiata by Peter

of Lombardy, and it was always supposed to have been written in

Italy. But Peter's name was obviously written over an erasure, and,

besides, spoilt the metre of the verses in which the inscription is

composed. Still the truth was never suspected until a brilliant

   * Dr. Gregory gives a list amounting to 2270, Lut his enumeration does not

pretend to be anything like exhaustive. *
172 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

conjecture by the Italian G. B. de Rossi, confirmed by a further dis-
covery by Prof. Hort, showed that the original name was not Peter
of Lombardy, Imt Ceolfrid of England. Then the whole history of
the MS. was made clear. It was written either at Wearmouth or at
Jarrow, famous schools in the north of England in the seventh a.nd
eighth centuries (having probably been copied from MSS. brought
from Italy by Ceolfrid, or by Theodore of Tarsus, see p. 179), and
was taken by Abbot Ceolfrid as a present to Pope Gregory II. in
the year 716. It was used in the revision of the Yulgate by Pope
Sixtus y. in 1585-90, and its present home is in the great Lauren-
tian Library at Florence. It is a huge volume, each leaf measure-
ing 19| in. by 13^ in., written in large and beautifully clear

-- letters. The passage shown in the Plate is Luke 4. 32 5. 6. An

example of a correction may be seen in col. 2., 13 lines from the

bottom, where tlie singulur imperative laxa has been altered by a
corrector to the plural Jaxafe, which corresponds more exactly with
the original Greek. The text is carefully and accurately written,
and it is taken by Wordsworth and White as their first and most
important authority.

   Among the other most important MSS. of the Yulgate are the
Codex Fuldensis, written in a.d. 54G for Bishop Victor of Capua,

containing only the Gospels, arranged in a consecutive narrative,

based on the Diatessaron (or Harmony) of Tatian, which was made
about A.D. 170 ; Codex Cavensis (ninth century), written in
Spain, and with a Spanish type of text ; Codex Toletanus
 (eighth century), very similar to the Cavensis ; the Lindisfarne
 Gospels (about a.d. 690), a splendid north English copy, resem-
 bling the Codex Amiatinus in text, described more fully on p. 179 ;
 the Harleian Gospels (sixth or seventh century), in the British
 Museum ; the Stonyhurst Gospels (seventh century), formerly
 at Durham, now at Stonyhurst, written in a beautiful little uncial
 hand ; and the manuscripts exhibiting the revision by Alcuin,
 described in the following chapter. As yet, no complete classifica-
 tion of the manuscripts into groups has been effected, and the
 relative value of the texts contained in them consequently remains
         LATIN VERSIONS OF THE' NEW TESTAMENT. 173

uncertain. Distinct types of text are recognisable in the manu-

scripts of certain countries, notably those of Ireland and Spain, of

which  we  shall  have  more  to  say in  the  next  chapter                                           and  it is
                                                                                                    ;

fairly clear that the best manuscripts are those which most nearly

resemble the Codex Amiatinus ; but for fuller knowledge we must
wait until Bishop Wordsworth and Mr. White are able to sum up

the results of their patient and long-continued labours.

So we close the list of our witnesses to the original text of the

We New Testament.       have traced, so far as we are able, the

history of the Greek text itself ; we have examined the principal

manuscripts of it, and classified them into families, which carry

us back far towards the date at which the sacred books were

originally written. Then we have enumerated all the early

translations of the New Testament into other languages, and have

described their several characteristics. With all this mass of

evidence, reinforced by the testimony given on isolated passages by

quotations in the early Christian writers, the trained scholar must

face the task of determining the true reading of each passage in
which the authorities differ. It has been the object of these

chapters to enable every student of the Bible to follow this process

with intelligent interest ; to understand why variations exist in
the text of the Bible, and on what principles and by what means

the true readings are distinguished from the false. In so doing,
we have given a history of the spread of the Bible, both in the

East and in the West, in the first five or six centuries after the
foundation of Christianity. In the chapters which follow we
shall trace the later fortunes of the Bible in the West and the
origin and history of our own English versions, thus linking
in one continuous chain the original Hebrew and Greek Scrip-
tures with the Bible which we read in our churches and homes

to-day.
                                    ( 174 )

                           CHAPTER IX.

                THE VULGATE IN THE MIDDLE AGES.

   THE history of the Bible in Western Europe is for a thousand

       years the history of the Vulgate, and of the Yulgate alone.

?                    In the East the Scriptures circulated in Greek,

       the Vulgate!  ^^ Syriac, in Coptic, in Armenian, in ^thiopic.
                     In the West, Latin was the only language of

   literature. The Latin language was carried by the Roman legion-

   aries into Africa, into Gaul, into Spain, into parts of Germany, and

   even to distant Britain ; and wherever the Latin language went,

   thither, after the conversion of the Empire to Christianity, went

   the Latin Bible. Throughout the period which we know as the

   Middle Ages, which may roughly be defined as from a.d. 500 to

   1500, almost all books were written in Latin. Latin was the

   language in which different nations commimicated with one

   another. Latin was the language of the monasteries ; and the
   monasteries were the chief centres of the learning which existed

   during those centuries. An educated man, speaking Latin, was

   a member of a society which included all educated men in Western

   Europe, and might be equally at home in Italy, in Gaul, and in

   We Britain.     shall see in the next chapter that translations of jjarts

   of  the  Bible    into  English  existed  from  a  very  early  time                        but
                                                                                            ;

   these were themselves translations from the Latin Bible, and for

   every copy of the Bible in English there were scores, or even

   hundreds, in Latin. The same was the case oil the Continent.

   Translations were made, in course of time, into French, Italian,

   and other languages ; but the originals of these translations were
   always Latin Bibles. . Every monastery had many copies ; and the
   relics of these, the remnant which escaped from the vast desti-uc-

   tions of the Reformation and all the other chances of time, fill our
THE VULGATE IN THE MIDDLE AGES.                                                                                   175

museums and libraries to-day. To the Latin Bible we owe our

Christianity in   England                                                and  in  tracing  its  fortunes  during  the
                                                                      ;

Middle Ages, we are but supplying the link between the early

naiTative of the spread of the Bible throughout Europe and its

special history in our own islands.

  We have said that the form in which the Bible was first made

known to the Latin-speaking people of the West was that of the

  Simnltaneous    Old Latin version. The African form of this
use of Old Latin  version spread along the Eoman provinces which
                  occupied the north of the continent in which it
  an u ga e.

was produced ; the European variety of it was propagated through-

out Gaul and Spain, while a revised and improved edition was

current in Italy in the fourth century. Then came the Vulgate,

the revised Latin Bible of St. Jerome, Undertaken as it was

at the express request of the Pope, it yet did not win im-

mediate acceptance. Even so great an authority as St. Augustine

objected to the extensive departures from the cuiTent version

which Jerome had made in his Old Testament, For some

centuries the Yulgate and the Old Latin existed side by side.

Complete Bibles were then rare. More commonly, a volume

would contain only one group of books, such as the Pentateuch

or the Prophets, the Gospels or the Pauline Epistles ; and it would

very easily happen that the library of any one individual would

have some of these groups according to the older version, and

others according to the Yulgate. Hence we find Christian writers

in the fifth and sixth centuries using sometimes one version and

sometimes the other ; and when complete copies of the Bible came
to be WTitten, some books might be copied from manuscripts of

the one type, and others from those of the other. Special

familiarity with particular books was a strong bar to the accept-

ance of the new text. Thus the Gospels continued to circulate

in the Old Latin much later than the Prophets, and the old ver-

sion of the Psalms was never superseded by Jerome's translation

at all, but continues to this day to hold its place in the received

Bible of the Eoman Church.
176 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

   One unfortunate result followed from this long period of simul-
taneous existence of two different texts, namely the intermixture

                          of readings from one with those of the other.
  mixtSyjf T^exts. Soribes engaged in copying the Vulgate would,

                          from sheer familiarity with the older version,
write down its words instead of those of St. Jerome ; and on the
other hand a copyist of the Old Latin would introduce into its

text some of the improvements of the Vulgate. When it is

remembered that this was in days when every copy had to be
written by hand, when the variations of one manuscript were
perpetuated and increased in all those which were copied from it,
it will be easier to understand the confusion which was thus intro-
duced into both versions of the Bible text. It is as though every
copy of our Revised Version were written by hand, and the copyists
were to substitute, especially in the best known books, such as the
Gospels, the more familiar words of the Authorised Version. Very
soon no two copies of the Bible would remain alike, and the con-
fusion would only be magnified as time went on.

   So it was with the Latin Bible in the Middle Ages. The fifth
and sixth centuries are the period during which the old and new
versions existed side by side. Li Italy the final acceptance of the
Vulgate was largely due to Gregory the Great (51)0-604). In

Gaul, in the sixth century, certain books, especially the Prophets,

were habitually known in Jerome's translation ; the rest were still

current mainly in the old version. In the seventh century the
victory of the Vulgate was general. But it was a sadly mutilated
and corrupted Vulgate which emerged thus victorious from the
struggle ; and the rest of the Middle Ages is the history of suc-
cessive attempts to revise and reform it, and of successive deca-
dences after each revision, until the invention of printing made it
possible to fix and maintain a uniform text in all copies of the

Bible.

   The truest text of the Vulgate was no doubt preserved in Italy.
The worst was unquestionably in Gaul, which we may now begin
to call France. But two countries, situated at different extremes
         THE VULGATE IN THE MIDDLE AGES.  177

of "Western Christendom, preserved somewhat distinct types of

__   V_ul,gat^e  .   text, which eventually had considerable influence
                     '  ''
The              in

Spain and upon the history of the Vulgate. These were

                     Spain and Ireland. Each was, for a consider-

able period, cut off from communication with the main body

of Christendom. ; Spain, by the Moorish invasion, which for a

time confined the Christian Visigoths to the north-western corner

of the peninsula ; Ireland, by the English conquest of Britain,

which drove the ancient Celtic Church before it, and interposed a

barrier of heathendom between the remains of that Church and

its fellow Christians on the Continent. · The consequence of this

isolation was that each Church preserved a distinct type of the

Vulgate text, recognisable by certain special readings in many

passages of the Bible. The Spanish Bible was complete, and its

text, though of very mixed character, contains some good and early

elements ; witness the Codex Cavensis and the Codex Toletanus,

mentioned on p. 172. The Irish Bible as a rule consists of the

Gospels alone, and its text is likewise mixed, containing several

remarkable readings ; but its outward form and ornamentation

were of surpassing beauty, and stamped their mark deep on the

history of the Bible for several centuries. Of this, as it especially

concerns our English Bibles, we shall have to speak more at

length.

   The seventh century is the most glorious period in the history
                                                                                                                                                                                      |

of the Irish Church. While Christianity was almost extinct in

Irish MSS.           England, while the Continent was torn with wars
                     and plunged in ignorance, the Irish Church was

producing the finest monuments of Christian art, as applied to the

ornamentation of manuscripts, which the world has ever seen, and

was sending forth its missionaries far and wide to call back
Europe and England to the Christian faith. In the seclusion of

their western isle, the Irish devised and perfected a style of

decoration, as applied to manuscripts, of absolutely unique beauty

and elaboration. The special feature of this style is its extra-

ordinarily intricate system of interlacing patterns, combined and

        S 2764.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                jjj;
178 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCETPTS.

continued with marvellous precision over a Avhole page throughout
the pattern of a huge initial letter. Looked at from a little

distance, a page of one of these manuscripts resembles a harmoni-

ous mosaic or enamelled pattern in soft and concordant colours.
Examine it closely, even with a magnifying glass, and the eye

wearies itself in following the intricacy of its pattern, and the
hand strives in vain to reproduce its accuracy even for a few
inches of its course. The use of gold gives to later illuminations

a greater splendour of appearance at first sight ; but no other style
shows a quarter of the inexhaustible skill and patient devotion

which is the glory of the Irish school and of their Anglo-Saxon

pupils.

For those who are acquainted with illuminated manuscripts,

this style of decoration is a striking monument of the introduction

I · h Mss  ^^ Christianity into northern England from the

introduced into Irish Church. While Augustine, the delegate of

           the Roman Church, was winning his way in

Kent, Irish missionaries had planted a settlement in the island

of lona, from which they preached the Gospel in southern Scot-
land ; and in the year 635 Oswald, who had learnt Christianity
while an exile at lona, sent to beg that a priest might be sent
to him to aid in the conversion of his newly-won kingdom of
Northumbria. Aidan Avas dispatched in answer to his call, to
become bishop of Lindisfarne ; and in Aidan's steps came a great
band of Irish and Scotch missionaries, who spread themselves

abroad in the land and planted Christianity there firmly and

finally. But in coming to England they did not forget the art

which they had learnt at home. In lona had perhaps been

produced the most splendid example of Irish illumination in
existence, the Book of Kells, now the special glory of the library
of Trinity College, Dublin ; but in England they executed other
manuscripts scarcely less magnificent, predominant among which

is the beautiful Lindisfarne Gospels, a page of which is repro-

duced in Plate XX.
   But while the decoration of the north EngUsh manuscripts was
PLATE XX.
                                                                                                                          .-W

                     '\ IjllCDCS UTDiIn^

                   -- The Lindisfarne Gospels Circ. a.d. 690.

                                                              {Origincd size, ISi in. x 10 in.)
                                                               ;;

THE VULGATE IN THE MIDDLE AGES.  170

wholly derived from Ireland, their text had, in great measui-e,

Texts of English ^ tlifferent origin, and was of a very superior

We M3S. derived quality.  have seen that the manuscript which

               contains the purest text of the Vulgate now

extant, the Codex Amiatinus, was written at Jarrow or "VYearmouth

A shortly before the year 716.  few years earlier, the book of the

Lindisfarne Gospels was written at Lindisfarne, and its text shows

a marked affinity to that of the Codex Amiatinus. J^fow the

source of the Lindisfarne text can be proved with practical cer-

tainty. It is a copy of the four GosjDels, written in a fine and

bold uncial hand, with magnificent ornamentation at the begin-

ning of each book. The main text is that of the Latin Vulgate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;

but between the lines a later hand has WTitten a paraphrase of

the Latin into the primitive English which we commonly call

Anglo-Saxon. Of this paraphrase more will be said in the next

chapter ; at present our concern with it lies in the fact that the

author of it has added at the end of the volume a history of

the manuscript. He tells us that it was written by Eadfrith,

Bishop of Lindisfarne, in honour of St. Cuthbert, the great saint

of Lindisfarne and Northumbria, who died in a.d. 687 ; that it
was covered and " made firm on the outside " by Ethilwald

that Billfrith the anchorite wrought in smith's work the orna-

ments on its cover ; and that he himself, Aldred, " an unworthy

and most miserable priest," wrote the English translation between

We the lines.  know, therefore, that the volume was written

shortly after the year 687. Now before each Gospel is placed

a list of festivals on which lessons were read from that book

and, strange as it may seem at first sight, it has been quite

recently sho-mi that these festivals are unquestionably festivals

of the Church of Naples. What is still more remarkable, this
strange fact can be completely explained. When Theodore of

Tarsus was sent by Pope Vitaliau to England in 669 to be

Archbishop of Canterbury, he brought with him, as his com-

panion and adviser, one Hadrian, the abbot of a monastery

near Naples. Theodore visited the whole of England, including

                                                           M2
180 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

Northumbria ; and there can be no reasonable doubt that the
Lindisfarne Gospels were copied from a manuscript which Abbot

Hadrian had brought with him from Italy. Here, then, we have

the clue to the origin of the excellent texts of the Vulgate found

in these north English manuscripts. There can be no doubt that

the Codex Amiatinus, though written in England, derived its

text from Italy, and carries on the best traditions of the Italian

Vulgate.

   The plate opposite this page is a much reduced copy of the first

words of the Gospel of St, Luke in the Lindisfarne book ; and even
                         in this reduction the beauty and elaboration of

     ^Gospefs*^^^ the intricately interlaced design which composes

                     the initial Q can be fairly seen. Between the

lines of the original writing is the English paraphrase, in a minute
cursive hand, without pretensions to ornament. The history of

the  MS. after  its  completion  deserves  a  word  of  mention                                              for a
                                                                                                          ;

special romance attaches to it, AYritten in honour of St. Cuthbert,

it was preserved at Lindisfarne along with the Saint's body ; but
in the year 875 an invasion of the Danes drove the monks to carry

away both body and book. For several years they wandered to

and fro in northern England ; then, in despair, they resolved to
cross over to Ireland. But the Saint was angry at being taken
from his own land, and a great storm met the boat as it put out ;
and as the boat lay on its side in the fury of the storm the precious

volume was washed overboard and lost. Realising the Saint's dis-

pleasure, the monks put back, in a state of much penitence and

sorrow for their loss ; but at last the Saint encouraged one of them
in a dream to search for the book along the shore, and on a day

of exceptionally low tide they found it, practically uninjured by its

immersion. The story is told by the chronicler Simeon of Durham,

writing about 1104 ; and it need not be dismissed as a mere
mediaeval legend. Precious volumes, according to the Irish prac-

tice, were carried in special cases or covers, which might well

defend them from much damage from the sea ; and it is certain
that several pages of this book (which was regularly known in
THE VULGATE IN THE MIDDLE AGES.  181

medifBval times as "the book of St. Cuthbert which fell into the
sea") show to this day the marks of injury from water which
has filtei'ed in from without. The subsequent history of the

MS. may be briefly told. Always accompanying the Saint's
body, it found homes at Chester-le-Street, Durham, and finally at
Lindisfarne once more. At the dissolution of the monasteries

it was cast abroad into the world and stripped of its jewelled
covers ; but was rescued by Sir Eobert Cotton, and passed with
his collection into the British Museum, where it now rests in
peace and safety.

   But this is a digression. The point which we have established
is the sj^read of the Vulgate from Ireland to northern England,

                         and the formation of an excellent text there by
  EngHshTcholar- ^^leans of copies brought from Italy. During the '
   ship in 8th and eighth and ninth centuries northern Eno-laud was

      9th centuries.

                       the most flourishing home of Christian scholarship
in western Europe. Wearmouth and Jarrow were the head-quarters
of the school : and the great names in it are those of Bede and
Alcuin. Bede (a.d. 674-735), the first great historian of England,
lived and died at Jarrow. Of him we shall have more to say in

the next chapter, in connection with the earliest translations of the
Bible into English. Alcuin (a.d. 735-805), on the other hand, is
intimately connected with the most important stage of "the history
of the Vulgate in the Middle Ages.

   While Ireland and England were taking the lead in promoting
the study and circulation of the Bible, the Bible in France was

                          sinking deeper and deeper into the confusion and

 hy Charlemagne corruption which have been described above. No

,,,.. to revise Vulgate one who has not worked among manuscripts caii
        in France.
                       know the endless degrees of deterioration to which

a much-copied text can sink, or realise the hopelessness of main-
taining for long a high or uniform standard of correctness.
Nothing but the strong hand of a reformer could check the pro-
gress of decay ; and that was at last found in the great emperor,

Charlemagne. From the beginning of his reign this monarch
182 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

      manifested great concern for the reformation of the text of the

? Scriptures. He forbad them to be copied by inexperienced boys

7 at schools ; and when he cast his eyes round for a scholar who

     might undertake the revision of the corrupted text, he naturally

    looked to England, and there found the man whom he required

in the person of Alcuin of York, the most distinguished scholar of

the day. Alcuin was invited to France; was attached to the court

at Aix and made master of the schools which Charlemagne estab-

lished in his palace, with the title and revenues of the abbot of St.

Martin of Tours : and subsequently retiring to Tours, inaugurated

there a great school of copyists and scholars, and there received

the commission of the emperor to prepare a revised and corrected

edition of the Latin Bible.

Two families of texts were then widely represented in France,

the Spanish and the Irish. These, coming respectively from south

          and north, met in the I'egion of the Loire, and

Vulgate^  both were known to Alcuin. In 79G we find him
          sending to York for manuscripts, showing how

highly he valued tlie text preseiTed in the copies of northern

England ; in 801 the revision was complete, and on Christmas

Day in that year a copy of the restored Yulgate was presented by

We liim to Charlemagne.      have evidence of several copies having

been made under Alcuin's own direction during the short remain-

der of his life, and although none of these has actually come

down to us, we yet possess several manuscripts which contain

Alcuin's text more or less perfectly preserved. The best of these

is the Codex Yallicellianus, containing the whole Bible, now in the

library of the Oratory adjoining the Church of Sta. Maria in

Yallicella, at Rome, but written at Tours in the ninth century,

probably in or soon after the life time of Alcuin. Another fine

copy (Brit. Mus. Add. MS. 10546, sometimes known as the Bible

of Charlemagne), likewise containing the whole Bible, may be seen

in one of the show-cases in the British Museum, and of this a

reproduction is given in Plate XXI. It is an excellent specimen

of the style of writing introduced in France during the reign of
PLATE XXI.

                  ^^m*^*^rc^r\zxnqux^.^YA;f^-,t^^mm^^^^

                             I li^drryez^^rrkxrci2uiodct~LTrnen<iA^^e-autAxtrrtc>ri

                                  Tnni>ccoWotxttTiufcjMrMcttU«^tTiufrijtrs7<c{i cacl»y» dtlt
                                ! <n^rn.txrex:rnxri<iAX^Jlriuffx£tj^rntxi'x^X£C--e--enxcAr-^

                                 ynunaaerctyiucc-er-tji.\ctcn~ij<cu.i \ e-iitnct^munAuftAci^

                         -jcp/^ n <>n tn Axi uA-foLi fed iri A^ux er^ fkri c"!" <^- Crfp^

                                     *fT^ttK3CfTlfT<aUatTn3ri»rt^Vp<^e-^"^Tn«a/^qntTrrrT<¥ai^
                                  rtutrefztwontJdA^rfpfjufUA^^cfXrTewif^errrrfariufui^

                                                                                                                    j

                  ^C tx»/?intonttifj«:wit»iajtcctptrnuf^xcfat"<^HtMcir»ri-*xttf"

                                      -rini<rrittmttrifS'-qat-n<>«cr<Jtz-AttofTierictxc*T«^Lc»«^

                                                                         f

                       -- Ai.cuin's Vulgate jth Cent.

                       (Original size of par/e, 20 nj. x 14| iw.; of part reproduced, 8i Jn. x 5 m.)
           THE VULGATE IN THE MIDDLE AGES.  183

Charlemagne, the special head-quarters of which was the school of
Tours, over which Alcuiii presided. It marked a new departure

in the history of Latin writing, and it was this style of writing

that indirectly formed the model from which our modern printed
types are taken. The MS. in question is ^-ritten in double

columns on a page measuring 20 inches by 14^. Here only part

of one column can be shown (and that much reduced in scale),

-- containing 1 John 4. 16 5. 10, and it will be seen that the famous

interpolation in verse 8 relating to the Three Witnesses is here
absent. As stated in the Variorum Bible, this text is found in no

Greek manuscript, with the exception of two, in which it is mani-

festly inserted from the Latin. It is a purely Latin interpolation,

though one of early origin, and it finds no place in Alcuin's
corrected Yulgate. There the text runs, " For there are three that

bear witness, the spirit, the water, and the blood ; and the three

are one."

The zeal of Charlemagne for the Bible was not manifested in his

encouragement of Alcuin's revision alone. From his reign date a

             series of splendid manuscripts of the Gospels,

Gospels of   written in gold letters upon wliite or purple vel-
 ar emagne.  j^^^^^ ^^^^ adorned with magnificent decorations.

The inspiration of these highly decorated copies is clearly derived

from the Irish and north English manuscripts of which we have

spoken above, and it is probable that here again Alcuin was the

principal agent in carrying the English influence into the Conti-

nent. It has at least been shown to be probable that the centre
from which these " Golden Gospels," as they are sometimes called,

took their rise, was in the neighbourhood of the Rhine, where

Alcuin was settled as master of the palace schools before his

retirement to Tours ; and the earliest examples of this style appear

to have been written during the time of his residence in that

region. In any case they are a splendid evidence of the value in

which the sacred volume was held, and they show how the tradi-

tion of the Irish illumination was carried abroad into France. The

characteristic interlacings of the Irish style are plainly evident.
184 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBITTS.

but the extent to which they are employed has diminished ; and

although the pi-ofuse employment of gold lends them a gorgeous-

ness which their predecessors do not possess, yet the skill and

labour bestowed upon them cannot be ranked so high, and the

reader who will compare the best examples of either class will

probably agree that, while both are splendid, the Books of Kells and

of Lindisfarne are even more marvellous as works of art than the

Golden Gospels of Charlemagne. The texts of these Gospels differ

from those of the Tours manuscripts in being closer to the Anglo-

8axon type, and this is quite in accordance with the theory which

assigns their origin to the influence of Alcuin, but at a period

earlier than that of his thorough revision of the Vulgate. Manu-

scripts of this class continued to be written under the successors

of Charlemagne, especially in the reign of Charles the Bald

(843-881) ; but after that date they disappear, and a less gorgeous

style of illumination takes the place of these elaborate and beauti-

ful volumes.

It was not only under the immediate direction of Charlemagne

that the desire for an improved text of the Yulgate was active.

                Almost simultaneously with Alcuin, Theodulf,

^i,J^^i^^°° °^  Bishop           of  Orleans, was undertakino; a revision
     Theodulf.                ^            '                                                                                    *=

                upon diilerent lines. Theodulf was probably a

Visigoth by birth, a member, that is, of the race of Goths which

had occupied Spain, and from which the Spaniards are in part

descended. He came from the south of France, and hence all

his associations were with the districts on either side of the

Pyi'enees. Thus, while Alcuin represented the Irish tradition of

the Bible text, Theodulf embodied the traditions of Spain. At

Orleans, however, of which see he was bishop about the year 800,

he stood at the meeting          place of  the two streams                                                                      and his revised
                                                                                                                             ;

Vulgate, though mainly Spanish in type, shows also traces of Irish

influence, as well as of the use of good Alcuinian MSS. His

revision is very unequal in value, and its importance is by no

means so great as that of Alcuin's work. Undertaken apart from

the influence of Charlemagne, it was never generally adopted, and
THE VULGATE IN THE MIDDLE AGES.        185

now survives in comparatively few manuscripts, the best of which

is in the National Library at Paris.*

One other school of Biblical study at this period deserves notice.

Not far from the Lake of Constance lies the monastery of St. Gall,

                        now a comparatively obscure and unvisited spot,

                    °^  ^^^ formerly a great centre of study and of pen-
'''^st^'fiT/            manship. At this day it is almost, if not quite,

unique in retaining still in the nineteenth century the library

which made it famous in the ninth. At a still earlier period it

was a focus of Irish missionary effort. L'ish monks made their

way to its walls, bringing with them their own peculiar style of

writing ; and manuscripts in the Irish style still exist in some
numbers in the library of St. Gall. The style was taken up and

imitated by the native monks ; and in the ninth century, under

the direction of the scribe and scholar Hartmut, the school of

St. Gall was definitely established as a prominent centre of activity

in the work of copying MSS. His successors, towards the end of

the century, developed a distinct style of writing, which became

generally adopted in the districts bordering on the Rhine. The

text of these St. Gall manuscripts, on the other hand, looks

southwards for its home, not north, and is derived from Milan,

with some traces of Spanish influence, instead of from Ireland.

   Thus in the ninth century a healthy activity prevailed in many

quarters, directed towards the securing of a sound text of the

 Subsequent             Bible. But permanence in goodness cannot be
deterioration.          maiutained so long as books are cop" ied by hand
                        alone. The errors of copyists undo the labours

of scholars, and in a shoit time chaos has come again. The

Alcuinian text was corrupted with surprising rapidity, and the

private labours of Theodulf had even less lasting an effect.

The decadence of the house of Charlemagne was reflected in

the decadence of the Bible text which he had striven to purify

   * The British Museum possesses a copy (Add. MS. 24124), known as

the Bible of St. Hubert, -which is at present exhibited in one of the show-

cases.
   186 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

   and establish. The invasion of the Normans broke up the school

   of Tours, as the invasion of the Danes broke up the school of

   "Wearmouth and Jarrow in Northmnbria. In these wars and

   A tumults scholarship went to the ground.  few individuals, such

   as our Xorman Archbishop Lanfranc, tried to check the growing

   corruption of the Bible text, but with only temporary effect. It

   was not until four centuries had passed away that a real and

   effectual attempt was made to restore the Vulgate to something

   like its ancient form.

   England had led the way in the ninth century; but in the

   thirteenth the glory belongs almost entirely to France. It is to

   the influence of the French king, St. Louis, and

?                           ^^® scholarship of the newly established Uni-

   th^iatlTceiiTury

   versity of Paris that the revision of the thirteenth

   century is due. Those who are acquainted with the manuscripts
   of the Vulgate in any of our great libraries will know what a

   remarkable proportion of them were written in this century. The

   small, compressed writing, arranged in double columns, with little

   decoration except simple coloured initials, becomes very familiar

   to the student of manuscripts, and impresses him with a sense

   of the great activity which must have prevailed at that period in

   nuiltiplying copies of the Bible. For us at the present day the

     l^rincipal result of the labours of the Paris doctors is the division

^ of our Bible into chapters. Divisions of both Old and New

   Testaments into sections of various sizes existed from very early

   times ; but our modern chapter-division was the work of Stephen
   Langton, then a doctor of the University of Paris, afterwards

   Archbishop of Canterbury and leader of the barons in the struggle

   which gave birth to Magna Charta. The texts of these Parisian

   Bibles are not, it must be admitted, of any very remarkable

   excellence ; but they are very important in the history of the

   Vulgate, because it is virtually upon them that the printed text of
   the Bible of the Roman Church is based to this day.

   "We are going ahead too fast, and shall have to retrace our steps

   in the next chapter; but it will be convenient to conclude here
PLATE XXII.

             !l lintimipiottrauittmaalu mnmiis          ptHmt bin" at nodin biuibtttt luran
                                                        at tttubtas. ft utbit tt9 tp tfftt bonu:
             flttortara.Ictta auttnttratmantett         tt Fattii f ntCpttt tt mant bits quart?,
                                                        iJi^tttiambtus . probutant aqut
               BatuanttOftetttantiimfaof abiUK          rrptiU anittir uiumna ft uolanlt fug

             II                                         ttttam : fuh finnanitra ttli.£ctamiq|

              a tontus Din fttdiatur luptt aquas.       bWB ttte gtanbia-tt Dninc anima oi

                   i                                    utamuatq; motabiltm qua proDujat^
                                                        rant aqut in Ipiats fuao:i omnt uo-
              Sum) iJtu9.|fiat W.tb: fada e luj.        lanlt Irrunbu genua fufi . ft Dibit bf«
                                                        u6qitff£Tbonu:bt«tbrattpn bittna.
               fx DiUit DfU8lutnniptC&tbDnfl:tt
                                                        tctfntt tt multipUfauiiniff rtplttt a*
                 I
                                                        quao mana : autCq; mulnplittniut
              I fliuifit luttmatcntbnB-affrtlauittn
                                                        fupnttttanuftJadututfjiteimaae
               lutmi Dmn tt tmtbrao nnttnn./fadu        bits quims . i^tpt quoq; bEU8.pco<
                                                        Uutat tttra anima mutnttium gnw*
              a Him tjB urfjpBx ^ manf Uite nnus.       tt fuDnumratai rtpttliai btftiaa ttts
                                                        tt rfcuuDur{rafsfuae.|Fadutita.ft
                quoq? JJtuB. jflat finnamratu in rat^   Fecit btuQ btGbastttttiuaalptaiofif

               am aquaru : tt oiuiDat aquas ab a»       m asnumnua i orant rtpnlt tatt gt'

             qma.£c frtit Dtue ficmararatu : Diui-      nnt ftio . ftmbit bnis tp tSn btnw:
                                                        tt att.jfatiam?lpramt ab magint -i
             fttqi aquae quf crantfub finuamtn^         ftftmbint uoBta-i pfit pitato marts*
             to ab bi)8 quf fwnt fupK finnaracn^
             turan fadura rft ua. Iijoiauitq; ixue      1 uolanlibJ trii-t feftija uniuftq; ttnr:
                                                        omiq? rtpnli qlj moutt i ttroLft nta-
             fimifttntntu rclun factum tft uriptrc       uit bwcbDmintabrauiginiitrimi'

             « tnant bits IraiiiDus. foisit utto Dt^     litubintfuaratabraiaginfinttinta*

             UB.CongtrgTutur aqutquf Tub rrin            uit illihmartulu tt frmina ttcauit eoe.
                                                         Btntbiani! illia btus · tt ait.jCrtftitt
             fumin locum anu tt ajpanat artOa.
                                                         tt mulnpUcamtm i rtplttt ttnam · tt
             i&&dura tfi ita.ft uotautt bfus an^         fubtntttainr^bomtnamnupirnbua

             bamttttamrtognganantTqj aqua?               raaria-iuolanlibue ftbimntiitrTtB
                                                         animanbus qut niourntur fug tttra,
             afljtllauuraatia. ft mbitucus cptT
                                                         £)mtqi baiB. fftcfiriJi uobio omnf
             ftt bonu- tt atL^raniiuttttta tjttba
                                                         bttbara aStttttttm ftumi fiig ratara-
             mccuttmttfatitainu tcintn : tt Itgnu        ttoniuralignaquri^bn i rtrntripie
                                                         ftmetf gtntria fui rut finr uobis rtfta-
             ponnfmi Mtnabidumiuira gtnu''               i tufie aiamtbuottrtr -. uliqi uolnai
                                                          ttb^uniuttfiBqitiD rmtHia-tti
             M: mm niius Tt  in ittntnpa fit fuptc
                                                         quibust anima uii; :utl|ahataD
             tenant . ft fadumtQ ita . ft protulit
                                                          uffttnbu.iftEa£tur' ra-Bibitq? Ctua
             ttcca btrbara uirtnttiu tt fotitiitan fe
                                                          nindaquf fttttat::! aaioaUif bouii.
             intniutta graus fuuiligaiiq? fatims

             fdtdii ct^bts unuq^q; fonratt &iim

             Ipedi Tua. ft uibu btua q:> tOtt iunu:

             tt &du ! ut(pm tt mant bits tttaua.

             iitfltq; aut btus . |iant luminaria

             In fintiammi trii · i biuibat ijicra at
             nmtfn fmt in fiptia t tqiora-^ bits "i
             anntjB : ut hitcat in ftmi aratto ttlt tt

             illtttmna tntiftfettutftita.ifratq?

             bnrauuD lurafaria magnaUurafate

             niatus utptflttbttittlnrafarrmin?

             m noto vx ptfftt
             ftriias-t piTrnt taa

             foxiaratto tib ui luctccra fnp tttta: tt

                             -- The Mazarin Bible a.d. 1456.

                                   {Original size, 15 in. x 11 in.)
THE VULGATE IN THE MIDDLE AGES.  ]87

the history of the Latin Bible. It has been made evident that, so

               long as Bibles continued to be copied by hand,

Lati" Bibles.  ^^ stability or uniformity of text could be main-
               tained. As with the Greek Bible, so with the

Latin, the later copies become progressively worse and worse. Hence

the enormous importance of the invention of printing, which made

it possible to fix and stereotype a form of text, and secure that it

should be handed on without substantial change from one genera-

tion to another. The first book printed in Europe, it is pleasant to

-- know, was the Latin Bible, the splendid Mazarin Bible (so-called

from the fact that the first copy which attracted much attention in

later times was that in the library of Cardinal Mazarin) issued by

Gutenberg in 1456, of which a copy may be seen exhibited in the

British Museum, and from which the first page is here given in

reduced facsimile (Plate XXIL). But this edition, and many

others which followed it, merely reproduced the current form of

text, without revision or comparison Avith the best manuscripts.

Ximeues and Erasmus, the first editors of the Greek printed Bible,

also bestowed much labour on the Latin text ; but the first really

critical edition was that prepared by Stephanus in 1528, and

revised by himself in 1538-40. No authoritative edition, how-

ever, was forthcoming until the accession to the Papal chair of

Sixtus y. in 1585.

Immediately on his accession, this energetic Pope appointed a

commission to revise the text of the Bible, and in the work of

               revision he himself took an active part. Good

         BiW^.^"^ manuscripts were used as authorities, intlud-
                         ing notably the Codex Amiatinus ; and in 1590

the completed work issued from the i3ress in three volumes.

The text resembles generally that of Stephanus, on which it was

evidently based. But hardly had Pope Sixtus declared his edition

to be the sole authentic and authorised form of the Bible, when he

died ; and one of the first acts of Clement VIII., on his accession

in 1592, was to call in all the copies of the Sixtine Bible. There

is no doubt that the Sixtine edition was full of errors. The
188 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

press had been very imperfectly revised, and a number of mistakes,

discovered after the sheets had been stnick off, were corrected by
means of hand -stamped type. It is beheved, however, that

Clement was also incited to this attack on his predecessor's

            memory by the Jesuits, whom Sixtns had offended.

Bible.      ^^^ ^^y ^^^6 the fact remains that Clement caused
            a new edition to be prepared, which appeared

towards the end of 1592. This edition was not confined to a

removal of the errors of the press in the Sixtine volumes, but

presents a considerably altered text, difi'ering, it has been estimated,
from its predecessor in no less than 3000 readings. Here at last

we reach the origin of the text of the Latin Bible current to-day
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;

for the Clementine edition, sometimes appearing under the name

of Clement, sometimes (to disguise the appearance of difference

between two Popes) under that of Sixtus, was constituted the one

authorised text of the Vulgate, from which no single variation is

permitted.

It cannot be pretended that the Clementine text is satisfactory

from the point of view of history or scholarship. The alterations

which differentiate it from the Sixtine edition, except where they

simply remove an obvious blunder, are, for the most part, no im-

provement ; and in any case, the circumstances of the time did
not permit so full and scientific an examination of all the evidence

as is possible now. The task of revising the Vulgate text in

accordance with modern knowledge has, however, been left almost

entirely to scholars outside the pale of the Eoman Church. Of

these the most conspicuous have been Richard Bentley in the past,

Bishop Wordsworth, Mr. White, M. Berger, and Dr. Corssen at

the present time. It may be that in the future the leaders of the
Eoman Church will be willing to make use of the labours of these

careful and accomplished scholars, and issue for the benefit of all
who use the Latin Bible a text which shall reproduce, as nearly as

may be, the original words of the version prepared by St. Jerome

fifteen hundred years ago.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ;

                  ( 189 )

                  CHAPTER X.

THE ENGLISH MANUSCEIPT BIBLES.

WE take another step forward in our story, and narrow still
             further the circle of our inquiry. It is no longer the

original text of the Bible with which we have to deal, nor even the

Bible of Western Europe. Our step is a step nearer home ; our
subject is the Bible of our own country and in our own language.

For nearly a thousand years, from the landing of Augustine to the

Reformation, the official Bible, so to speak, the Bible of the Church

services and of monastic usage, was the Latin Vulgate. But al-

though the monks and clergy learnt Latin, and a knowledge of

Latin was the most essential element of an educated man's culture,

it was never the language of the common people. To them the

Bible, if it came at all, must come in English, and from almost

the earliest times there were churchmen and statesmen whose care

it was that, whether by reading it for themsel'^s, if they were

able, or by hearing it read to them, the common people should have

at least the more important parts of the Bible accessible to them

in their own language. For twelve hundred years one may fairly

say that the English people has never been entirely without an

English Bible.

It was in the year 597 that Augustine landed in Kent, and

brought back to that part of the island the Christianity which had

"^                been driven out of it by our Saxon, Jute, and

   of EngYand?""  ^ugle forefathers. In 634, Birinus, a Roman

                  priest from Gaul, converted the West Saxons

and in 635 came Aidan from Zona to preach Christianity in

Northumbria, as related in the last chapter. Soon after the

middle of the century all England had heard the Word of Christ,
   190 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

   proclaimed by word of month by the missionaries of Eome or of

   Ireland. At first there wonld be no need of a written Bible for

   the common people. As in the days of Christ and His Apostles,

   men heard the Word of God by direct i^reaching. Most of them

   could not read, and the enthusiasm of a convert requires personal

   instraction rather than study of a written book. Yet it was not

   Th B"bi                    ^^^''» ^sfore the story of the Bible made its ap-

   paraphrase of pearance in English literature. In the abbey of

                              the Lady Hilda at Whitby was a brother named

   Csedmon, who had no skill in making songs, and would therefore

   leave the table when his turn came to sing something for the

   pleasure of the company. But one night when he had done so,

   and had lain down in the stable and there fallen asleep, there

   stood One by him in a dream, and said, " Cuedmon, sing Me some-
   thing." And he answered, " I cannot sing, and for that reason I
   have left the feast." But He said, " Nevertheless, thou canst sing
   to Me." " What," said he, " must I sing ? " And He said,

   " Sing the begmning of created beings." So he sang ; and the
   poem of Cffidmon is the first native growth of English litera-

   ture. It is a paraphrase in verse of the Bible narrative, from

   both Old and New Testaments, written in that early dialect

   Avhich we call Anglo-Saxon, but which is really the ancient form

   of English.

   Csedmon's Bible paraphrase was written about G70, a generation

   after the  coming          of  Aidan                                and another generation  had  not
                                                                    ;

                              passed away before part of the Bible had been

                          °^  actually  translated                     into  English.          A^dhelm,
   '''^AldSm'!

/                             Bishop of Sherborne, who died in 709, translated

   the Psalms, and thereby holds the honour of having been the first

   translator of the Bible into our native tongue. It is uncertain

   whether we fctill possess any part of his work, or not. There is a

   version of the Psalms in Anglo-Saxon, preserved in a manuscript

   at Paris, which has been supposed to be the Psalter of Aldhelin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;

   but the manuscript was only written in the eleventh century,

   and the language of the translation seems to contain form3
       THE ENGLISH MANUSCRIPT BIBLES.                  101

which had not come into existence in the time at which Aldhelm
lived. If, therefore, this version, which gives the first fifty
Psalms in prose and the rest in verse, really belongs to Aldhelm
at all, the language must have been somewhat modified in later

copies.

  The next translator of whom Ave heai' is the greatest name iu

the history of the early English Church. Bede (674-735) was

Bede.  ,··,.,,, the glory of the Northumbrian school, which, as
           ,                ,.
       we        seen, was       most  shining  light  of
           have             the

learning in western Europe during the eighth century. In
addition to his greatest work, the History of the EmjUsh Churchy

he wrote commentaries on many of the books of the Bible. These

works, which were intended primarily for scholars, were ^mtten
in Latin ; but we know that he also took care that the Scriptures

might be faithfully delivered to the common people in their own
tongue. He translated the Creed and the Lord's Prayer, as the

first essentials of the (Christian faith; and at the time of his

death he was engaged on a translation of the Gospel of St. John.

^ The story of its completion, told by his disciple, Cuthbert, is

well known, but it never can be omitted in a history of the

English Bible. On the Eve of Ascension Day, 735, the great

scholar lay dying, but dictating, while his strength allowed, to

his disciples ; and they wrote down the translation of the Gospel
as it fell from his lips, being urged by him to write quickly,
since he knew not how soon his Master would call him. On

Ascension morning one chapter alone remained unfinished, and
the youth who had been copying hesitated to press his master

further ; but he would not rest. " It is easily done," he said,
"take thy pen and write quickly." Failing strength and the

last farewells to the brethren of the monastery prolonged the

task, till at eventide the boy reminded his master: "There is
yet one sentence unwritten, dear master." "Write it quickly,"
was the answer ; and it was written at his word. "It is written

now," said the boy. "You speak truth," answered the saint, " it
is finished now." Then he bade them lay him on the pavement
   192 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

   of his cell, supporting his head in their hands ; and as he repeated
   the Gloria, with the name of the Holy Spirit on his lips, he
    passed quietly away.

       Of Bede's translation no trace or vestige now remains ; nor
^are we more fortunate when we pass from the great scholar of

   the early Church to the great statesman, King Alfred. Alfred,
   by far the finest name among the early sovereigns of England,
    careful for the moral and intellectual welfare of his people, did

   not neglect the work which Aldhelm and Bede had begun. He
   prefixed a translation of the Ten Commandments and other ex-
   tracts from the Law of Moses to his own code of laws, and

    translated, or caused to be translated, several other parts of the

   Bible. He is said to have been engaged on a version of the

    Psalms at the time of his death ; but no copy of his w^ork

   has survived, although a manuscript (really of later date) now
   in the British Museum,* and containing the Latin text with an
   English translation between the lines, has borne the name of
   King Alfred's Psalter. Still, though nothing has come down to
    us from Bede or Alfred, the tradition is valuable, as assuring

    us of the existence of English Bibles, or parts of Bibles, in the

   eighth and ninth centuries. From the end of this period we have
    an actual example of an English Psalter still extant ; for a manu-
    script in the British Museum, containing the Psalms in Latin,

    written about a.d. 700 (though formerly supposed to have belonged
    to St. Augustine himself), has had a word-for-word translation
    in the Kentish dialect inserted about the end of the ninth century.
    In the tenth century we stand on firmer ground, for, in addition
    to similar interlinear translations, we reach the date of independent

   versions, known to us from copies still extant in several of our

    public libraries.
        It is indeed possible that the Gospels were rendered into

    English earlier than the tenth century, since one would naturally
    expect them to be the first part of the Bible which a trans-

                               * Stowe MS. 2, of the eleventh century.
                                                          ;

             THE ENGLISH MANUSCRIPT BIBLES.     193

lator would wish to make accessible to the common people

Interlinear       but we have no actual mention or proof of the
   glosses.       existence of such a translation before that date,
                  As in the case of the Psalter, the earliest form

in which the Gospels appear in the English language is that of

glosses, or word-for-word translations written between the lines

of Latin manuscripts ; and the oldest copy of such a gloss now

in existence is that of which mention has already been made in

describing the Lindisfarne book of the Gospels. That magnifi-

cent volume was originally written in Latin about the year 700
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;

and about 950 Aldred the priest wrote his Anglo-Saxon para-

phrase between the lines of the Latin text. Some words of this

translation may be seen in the facsimile given in Plate XX. ; and
we may regard them with a special interest as belonging to the

oldest existing copy of the Gospels in the English language. The

dialect in which this translation is written is naturally North-

umbrian, which differed in some respects from that spoken in

other parts of the island. Another gloss of the Gospels is found

M in a manuscript at Oxford, known as the Rushworth S. It

is of somewhat later date than the Lindisfarne book, and

in the Gospels of St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. John it follows

that manuscript closely ; but the gloss on St. Matthew is in

the Old Mercian dialect, which was spoken in the central part

of England.

These glosses were, no doubt, originally made in order to assist

the missionaries and preachers who had to instruct their con-

  The G 1         gregations in ^the message of the Gospel ; and
                  the same must have been the object of the
of the loth cen-  earliest independent translations of the Bible
         tury.

books. Few, if any, of the ordinary English inhabitants would

be able to read; but the monks and priests who preached to

them would interpret the Bible to them in their own tongue,

and their task would be rendered easier by the existence of

We written English Gospels.  know, moreover, that during the

latter part of the Anglo-Saxon period, the culture and scholarship

S 2764.                                      N
 194 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCEIPTS.

  of the English clergy declined greatly, so that the preachers them-
 selves would often be unable to understand the Latin Bible, and
 needed the assistance of an English version. It is in the south that
 we first meet with such a translation of the Gospels existing by
 itself, apart from the Latin text on which it was based. There
 are in all six copies of this translation now extant, two at Oxford,
 two at Cambridge, and two in the British Museum. All these are
 closely related to one another, being either actually copied from

 one another, or taken from a common original without much
 variation. The oldest is a manuscript in the library of Corpus

 Christi College, Cambridge, which was written by one ^Elfric, at
 Bath, about the year 1000. There can be no doubt that the
original translation, of which these are copies, was made in the
south-west of England, in the region known as "Wessex, not later

than about the middle of the tenth century. It may have been
made earlier, but we have no evidence that it was so, and the

total absence of such evidence must be taken as an unfavourable

sign.

    In Plate XXIII. is given a facsimile of one of the British
Museum copies of this first independent version of the Gospels
in English. The manuscript, which was written in the early part
of the twelfth century, has an interest of its own, even apart
from its contents; and its history is partly told by the inscrip-
tions which it bears on its first page, here reproduced. This
page contains the beginning of St. Mark's Gospel, which holds
the first place in the Anglo-Saxon Gospels, and is headed
" Text[usJ iiii. evangelior[um]," i.e. " The text of the four Gos-
pels." To the right of this are the words " aug". d xvi. G* IIII."
Below is the name "Thomas Cantuarien[sis] " and the figures
" 1 a. xiv " ; and at the bottom of the page (not included in the
plate) is the signature " Lumley." What do all these inscriptions
tell us of the history of the MS. ? They tell us that it belonged
to the great monastery of St. Augustine at Canterbury, in the
library of which it bore the press-mark " D[istinctio] xvi,
G[r]a[dus] IV " ; that after the dissolution of the monasteries
PLATE XXIII.

                    P ' 1.

uiK "Km aatv^ -to?

    -- English Gospels of the Tenth Century 1'2tk Cent.

(Orif/inal size of page. Si in. x 5f «».; of part reproduced, i\ in. x 5 in.)
THE ENGLISH MANUSCUFPT BIBLES.                                                                195

it passed into the possession of Archbishop Thomas Cranmer,
whose secretary wrote his name (in a hand closely resembling

the prelate's own writing) at the head of  the page                                           that after
                                                                                           ;

Cranraer's death it was acquired, with many others of his books,

by Henry Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, from whom it descended

to his son-in-law, John, Lord Lumley. Lumley died in 1G09,

and his library was bought for Henry, Prince of Wales, eldest

son of James I. Thereby this volume entered the Royal Library,

A in which it bore the press-mark 1 xiv. ; and when that library

was presented to the nation by George II. in 1757, it passed into

the keeping of the British Museum, then newly established ; and
there, retaining the same press-mark, it still remains. So much

history may a few notes of ownership convey to us.

Some readers may be curious to see the form of the language in

which this first English Bible is written. It is unlike enough to

our modern English, yet it is its true and direct ancestor. After

quoting the first words of the Gospel in Latin, the translation
begins thus : " Her ys Godspelles angin, halendes cristes godes

sune. Swa awriten ys on thaswitegan bee isaiam. Nu ic asende

mine asngel beforan thinre ansyne. Se gegarewath thinne weg

beforan the. Clepigende stefen on tham westene gegarwiath

drihtnes weg. Doth rihte his sytbas. lohannes waes on westene

fulgende & bodiende. Daedbote fulwyht on synna forgyfenysse."

This specimen will probably be enough for those who have no

special acquaintance with Anglo-Saxon. Shortly after the date at

The Old Tes-  which this version of the Gospels was probably
              niade, in or about the year 990, ^Ifric, Arch-

              bishop of Canterbuiy, translated a considerable

part of the Old Testament, namely, the Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges,

Kings, Esther, Job, Judith, and Maccabees, omitting such pas-

sages as seemed to him less necessary and important. Two copies

of this version are known, at Oxford and in the British Museum.

This completes the history of the English Bible before the Xorman

Conquest. That catastrophe seems to have crushed for a time

the literary development of the English people. Tlie upper class

                                                                     N2
196 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

was overthrown and kept in subjection; the lower orders were

too ignorant to carry on the work for themselves. It is true

that the existence of the manuscript described just above is a

proof that the early English version of the Gospels continued to

be copied, and  presumably read, in  the  twelfth  century                                    but it
                                                                                           ;

is not until the century after this that we find any resumption

of the task of translating the Scriptures into the language of

the common people. In the reigns of John and Henry III. the

,,  ,  ,        intermixture between Norman and English was
Verse transla-

tions in the progressing fast, and the English element was

                beginning to assert its predominance in the

coinbination. English poetry begins again with Layamon about

the year 1205. Ten years later religious verse made its reappear-

ance in the " Ormulum," a metrical version of the daily services

of the Church, including portions of Scripture from the New

Testament. About the middle of the century the narratives of

Genesis and Exodus were rendered into rhyming verse ; and

towards its end we find a nearer approach to regular translation

in a metrical version of the Psalter which has come down to us

in several copies. It is curious that, at this time, the Psalter

seems to have been in especial favour in England, almost to the

exclusion of the other books of the Bible. For about a century,

from 1250 to 1350, no book of the Bible" seems to have been

translated into English except the Psalter ; and of this there

were no less than three distinct versions within that period. In

addition to the verse translation just mentioned, of which the

author is unknown, the Psalms were rendered into prose in 1320

by William of Shoreham, Yicar of Chart Sutton, in Kent ; and

almost at the same time Richard RoUe, a hermit of Hampole,

near Doncaster, prepared another version, accompanied by a com-

mentary, verse by verse.

Some specimens of these translations will show the progress

of the English language, and carry on the history of the English

-- Bible. The following is the beginning of the 56th Psalm as

it appears in the version of William of Shoreham : " Have
                                                                                               ;

                                               THE ENGLISH MANUSCRIPT BIBLES.  197

mercy on me, God, for man ha.th defouled me. The feude trubled

                                               me, fe^/itand * alday oghajus, me. Myn enemys

William of                                     defouled me alday, for many were feght'dud
Shoreham,
                                               Y Q^/^ains me.  shal dred the fram the hef/ht of

the daye                                    y for sothe shal hope in the.  Hii shal hery my wordes,
                                         ;

what manes flesshe doth to me. Alday the wicked acarseden myn

wordes o^Aains me ; alle her thoutes ben in ivel."

In Richard Rolle of Hampole, the verses are separated from one

another by a commentary, much exceeding the original text in

                                               length. Many copies of this version exist, but
and of Richard ,
                                               , . ,,.

KoUe of Ham- they differ considerably from one another, so

^° ®'                                          that it is difficult to say which represents best

the author's original work. Here is the same passage as it appears

in one of the manuscripts (Brit. Mus. Arundel MS. 158) : " Have
mercy of me, God, for man trad me, al day the fjghtjnge troublede

me. Myn enemys me trede al day for many fjghtj-age a,ghene& me.

Fro the hjghnesse of the day schal I drede : I sothly schal hope in

the. In God I schal preyse my wordes, in God I hopede. I schal
noght drede what flesch doth to me. Al day my wordes thei

cursede a^Aenes me, alle the tho^Ates of hem in yvel."

Such was the knowledge of the Bible in England on the

eve of the great revival which took place in the fourteenth

.                                           .  century. The old Anglo-Saxon version of the

of religion in Gospels had dropped out of use, as its language

                                               gradually became antiquated and unintelligible

and no new translation had taken its place. The Psalms alone

were extant in versions which made any pretence to be faithful.

The remaining books of the Bible Avere known to the common

people only in the shape of rhyming paraphrases, or by such oral

teaching as the clergy may have given. But with the increase of

life and interest in the lower classes, and with the revival of

literary activity in the English language, this condition of things

   * The letter represented by gk sometimes corresponds to our y, sometimes
to g or gb.
198 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

could not last. The end of the thirteenth century had seen the

first recognition of the right of the common folk to representation

in the national Council, which thenceforward became a Parlia-

ment. The reigns of Edward II. and Edward III. .saw the steady-

growth of a spirit of healthy life and independence in the people.
They saw also the rise of literature, in Langland and Gower, and

above all in Chaucer, to a position of real influence in the

national life. And with this quickening interest in their sur-

roundings on the part of the common people, there came a

quickening interest in religion, which was met and answered by

the power and the will to provide religious teaching for them

in their own language. Thus was the way prepared for the

7 religious movement which makes the fourteenth century so im-

   portant a period in the history of our Church and Bible. In

France, under the stimulus of the University of Paris, and perhaps

^ of the king, St. Louis, the awakening had come a century sooner,

and had manifested itself alike in a revised edition of the current

Yulgate text, with a great multiplication of copies for common

~) and private use, and in the preparation of the first complete ver-

sion of the Bible in French. In England the result of the

movement was likewise an increased circulation of the Bible,

but it was a Bible in the language of the people.

The movement of which w^e are speaking is commonly connected

in our minds, and quite rightly, with the name of Wycliffe ; but it
is impossible to define exactly the extent of his own personal par-
ticipation in each of its developments. The movement was at

first discountenanced, and presently persecuted, by the leading
authorities in Church and State ; and hence the writers of works

in connection with it were not anxious to reveal their names.

Most  of  the  publications  on  the AVycliffite  side  are  anonymous
                                                                                                            ;

' and the natural consequence of this is that nearly all of them

have been, at one time or another, attributed to Wyclifte himself.

So far, however, as our immediate subject, the translation of the

     Bible, is concerned, there is no reason to doubt the personal

; responsibility of Wycliffe ; nor is there any sufficient reason for
             Tmr EUTGLmH manuscefpt bibles.  199

the opinion, which has been sometimes held, that a complete

English Bible existed before his time. It rests mainly on the

statement of Sir Thomas J\Iore, in his controversy with Tyndale,

the author of the first printed English New Testament, that he
had seen English Bibles of an earlier date than Wycliffe's. No

trace of such a Bible exists, and it is highly probable that More

was not aware that there were two "Wycliffito translations, and had
mistaken the date of the earlier one. To the history of these

translations, the first complete Bible in the English language, we
may now proceed.

John Wycliffe was born in Yorkshire about the year 1320. He

entered Balliol College at Oxford, and presently became Fellow,

          .  and, for a short time. Master of that College;

                           but resigned the latter post when, in 1361, he
was presented to the living of Fillingham, in Lincolnshire. It was

not until he had passed middle life that he began to take part in
public controversies ; but when he did so, he at once became the
most prominent leader of the party of reform. It was a period of
discontent in England ; discontent at the long and costly war with

France, discontent at the demands of the Pope for money, dis-

content at the wealth of the higher dignitaries and corporations of

the Church, who, in the main, supported the claims of the Pope,

Wycliflfe's first work was a treatise justifying the refusal of
Parhament to pay the tribute claimed by the Pope in 1366 ; and
from 1371 he was in the forefront of the religious and social dis-
turbance which now began to rage. Papal interference and

Church property were the main objects of his attack, and his chief

enemies were the bishops. He was supported in most of his
struggles by John of Gaunt, who wished to humiliate the Church;

by the University of Oxford, consistently faithful to him except
when he committed himself to theological opinions which it held
heretical ; and by the great mass of the common people, whose

views he reflected with regard to the Pope and the Papal sup-

porters.

With the political and religious controversy we have here
200 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIEI^n^HlWmiPTS.

nothing to do. Whether Wycliffe was right or wrong in his
attack on Church property or in his gewwally eocidiistic schemes
concerns us not now. Eeformers are often carried to extremes
which dispassionate observers must condemn. But his champion-
ship of the common people led him to undertake a work which
entitles him to honourable mention by men of all parties and all

-- opinions, the preparation of an English Bible which e^ery man

who knew his letters might read in his own home. And that even
those who could not read might receive the knowledge of the

teachings of this Bible, he instituted his order of " poor priests "

to go about and preach to the poor in their own tongue, work-
ing in harmony with the clergy if they would allow them, but
against them or independent of them if they were hostile.

    The exact history of Wycliffe's translation of the Bible is uncer-
tain. Separate versions of the Apocalypse and of a Harmony of

                           the Gospels have been attributed to him, with
  "Wycliffite^Bfwe. ^°^^ °^' ^^^^ probability, but with no certainty.

                           In any case these were but preludes to the great

work. The New Testament was first finished, about the year

1380 ; and in, 1382, or soon afterwards, the version of the entire

Bible was completed. He was now rector of Lutterworth, in

 Leicestershire, living mainly in his parish, but keeping constantly

in touch with Oxford and London. Other scholars assisted him
in his work, and we have no certain means of knowing how much
of the translation was actually done by himself. The Is["ew Testa-
 ment is attributed to him, but we cannot say with certainty that it
 was entirely his own work. The greater part of the Old Testament
 was certainly translated by Nicholas Hereford, one of Wycliffe's
most ardent supporters at Oxford. Plate XXIY. gives a repro-
 duction of a page of the very manuscript written under Hereford's
 direction, now in the Bodleian Library at Oxford (Bodl. 959). The

 manuscript itself seems to tell something of its history. It breaks
 off quite abruptly at Baruch 3. 20, in the middle of a sentence, and
 it is evident that Hereford carried on the work no further ; for
 another manuscript at Oxford, copied from it, ends at the same
Pl.ATK XXIV.

                                                               SC
THE ENGLISH MANUSCEIPT BIBLES.  201

place, and contains a contemporary note assigning the work to
Hereford. It may be supposed that this sudden break marks the
time of Herefoi-d's summons to Loudon in 1382, to answer for his
opinions, which resulted in his excommunication and retirement
from England. The manuscript is written by five different scribes.

-- The page exhibited, which contains Ecclesiasticus 47. G 48. 17,

shows the change from the fourth hand to the fifth, with correc-
tions in the margin which may be those of Hereford liimself.
After Hereford's departure the translation of the Old Testament
was continued by Wycliffe himself or his assistants, and so the
entire Bible was complete in its English dress before the death of

Wycliffe in 1384.

  A marked difference in style distinguishes Hereford's work from

that of Wycliffe and his other assistants, if such there were.
Wycliffe's style is free and colloquial. There can be little doubt

that he had in his mind the common people, for Avhom his version

was especially intended, and that he wi'ote in a style which they
would understand and appreciate. Hereford, on the other hand,
was a scholar, perhaps a pedant, trained in University ideas of

exactness and accuracy. He clung too closely to the exact words

of the Latin from which his translation was made, and hence his
style is stiff and awkward, and sometimes even obscure from its
too literal faithfulness to the original. Wycliffe's own work also
was capable of improvement, and the strong contrast in style
between him and his colleague called aloud for a revision of the

                         whole version. Such a revision was taken in
  Wycliffite^Bible. li^nd, shortly after Wycliffe's death, by one of his

                          followers, and was completed probably about the
year 1388. The pupil who executed it has left a preface, in which
he describes the principles upon which his revision was made, but
he has not told us his name ; from internal evidence, however, and
especially from the verbal resemblance between this preface and
other writings of which the author is known, he is believed to
have been John Purvey, one of Wycliffe's most intimate friends
during the latter part of his life, and a sharer in the condemnation
202 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

of Nicholas Hereford. The Old Testament, which stood most in

need of revision, was completed first, and the reviser's preface

relates to that alone. The New Testament followed later. This

revised version rapidly supplanted its predecessor, and became

the current form of the WycliflBte Bible during the fifteenth

century.

          About a hundred and seventy copies of the Wycliffite Bible are

A now known to be in existence ; and of these, five-sixths contain

      the revised edition by Purvey, while less than thirty have the

original form of the translation. The following instance will show

the character of this, the first complete English Bible, and the

extent of the alterations made by Purvey. In the first passage the

author  of  the  older  version  is      Hereford                                           in  the  second  it  is
                                                                                         ;

Wycliife or one of his unnamed assistants.

        EABLIER VEKSION.                          LATEE VERSION.

                 Isaiah 35. 1-6.                            Isaiah 35, 1-6.

    Griaden shal desert and the -with        The forsakun Judee and with outen
oute weie, and ful out shal io^en the    "weie schal be glad, and wildirnisse
wildernesse, and flouren as a lilie.     schal make ful out ioye, and schal
Buriownynge it shal burioune, and        floure as a lilie. It buriownynge
ful out io^en, ioyeful and preising.     schal buriowne, and it glad and prei-
The glorie of Liban is yo\XQ to it, the  singe schal make ful out ioie. The
fairnesse of Carmel and of Saron ; thei  glorie of Liban is youun to it, the
shul see the glorie of the Lord, and     fairnesse of Carmele and of Sarou
the fairnesse of oure God. Couni-
forteth the hondes loosid atwynne,                                                                                                                                                                      ;
and the feble knees strengtheth.
Seith,yee of litil corage, taketh coum-  thei schulen se the glorie of the Lord,
fort, and wileth not dreden ; lo ! oure
God veniaunce of yelding shal bringe,    and the fairnesse of oure God. Coum-
God he shal come and sauen us.           forte yQ comelid hondis, and make ye
Thanne shul beu opened the eyen of       strong feble knees. Seie ye, men of
blynde men, and eres of deue men         litil coumfort, be ?/e coumfortid, and
shal ben opened. Thanne shal lepe as     nyle ye drede ; lo ! oure God schal
an hert the halte, and opened shal be    brynge the veniaunce of yelding, God
the tunge of doumbe men ; for kut        hym silf schal come, and schal saue
ben in desert watris, and stremes in     us. Thanne the i_^en of blynde men
                                         schulen be openyd, and the eeris of
wildernesse.                             deef men schulen be opyn. Thanne a
                                         crokid man schal skippe as an hert,
                                         and the tunge of doumbe men schal
                                         be openyd ; for whi watris ben
                                         brokun out in desert, and stremes in

                                         ,wUdirnesse.
THE ENGLISH MANUSCEIPT BIBLES.                                                          203

       EAELIEE VEESION.                   LATER VERSION.

                 Hebretn's 1. 1-3.        Hebkews 1. 1-3.

   Manyfold and many maners sum           God, that spak sum tyme bi pro-
tymo God spekinge to fadris in pro-
                                          phetis in many maneres to oure fadris,
plietis, at the laste in thes daies spak
                                          at the laste in these daies he hath
to us in the sone : whom he ordeynede
eyr of alle thingis, by whom he made      spoke to us bi the  sone                      whom  he
                                                                                     ;
and the worldis. The which whanne
he is the schynynge of glorie and         hath ordeyned eir of alle thingis, and
figure of his substaunce, and berynge
alle thingis bi word of his vertu,        bi whom he made the worldis. Which
makyng purgacioun of synnes, sittith
on the righthalf of mageste in high       whanne also he is the brightnesse of
thingis ; so moche maad betere than
aungelis, by how moche he hath in-        glorie, and figure of his substaunce,
herited a more difierent, or excellent,   and berith all thingis bi word of his
name bifore hem.
                                          vertu, he makyth purgacioun of synnes

                                          and syttith on the righthalf of the
                                          maieste in heuenes ; and so much is
                                          maad betere than aungels, bi hou

                                          myche he hath enerited a more dy-

                                          uerse name bifor hem.

   Such is the first complete English Bible, the first Bible which

we kuow to have circulated among the common people of England.
Many of the copies which now remain testify that they were
intended for private use. They are not large and well-written

volumes, such as would be placed in libraries or read to a congre-

-- gation. Such copies there were, indeed, volumes which were

found in kings' houses and in monastic libraries, as we shall aee
presently ; but those of Avhich we are now speaking are small,
closely-written copies, with no ornamentation, such as a man
would have for his own reading and might carry in his pocket.
In this form the Bible reached those who could not read Latin.
It had indeed travelled a long way. It was no careful rendering
of an accurately studied and revised Greek text, such as we have
to-day. The original Greek had been translated into Latin long
centuries before ; the Latin had become corrupted and had been
revised and translated anew by St. Jerome ; St. Jerome's version
had become con-upted in its turn, and had suffered many things
of editors and copyists ; and from copies of this corrupted Latin
the English translation of Wycliffe and Purvey had been made.
Still, through all these changes and chances, the substance of
the Holy Scriptui"es remained the same ; and, with whatever
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ;

204 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

imperfections, the entire Bible was now accessible to the Eng-

lish in their own language, through the zeal and energy of
John Wycliffe.

   So, at least, it has always been held ; and it is nothing less
than astounding to find it now suggested that the Wycliffite

W Is the  cliffit  ^^^^ is ^^^* Wycliffe's at all, but is the work

    Bible really   of his bitterest opponents, the bishops of the

    Wycliffe's?    English Church who represented the party of

Rome. Such is the remarkable assertion recently made by a.
well-known Roman Catholic scholar in England, Father Gasquet.*

Father Gasquet has earned honourable distinction for his careful

and original work on the history of the Reformation of the

English Church ; and any views expressed by him on a matter

of history deserve respect and notice. In the present case it is

difficult not to feel that he has gone upon insufficient evidence

but the subject is interesting enough to deserve fuller discussion.

Father Gasquet's main points are as follows : (1) the evidence

 Theory that       jo'v/j connecting Wycliffe with an English version of
    it was an      the Bible is very slight                                                                                                  (2) the hostility of the
                                                                                                                                          ;
authorised ver-
    sion issued    bishops to an English Bible has been much

 y e IS ops.       exaggerated, and there is no sign that the

possession or use of such a Bible was commonly made a subject

of inquiry in the examinations of Wycliffe's adherents                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (3)  the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ;

character of the extant copies, and the rank and known opinions

of their original owners, are such as to be inconsistent with

the idea that they were the work of a poor and proscribed sect,

as  the  Wycliffites  are  represented  to  have                                                                                             been                      (4) there are
                                                                                                                                                                    ;

indications of the existence of an authorised translation of the

Bible at this period, and this we must conclude to be the ver-

sion which has come down to us. The Bible of Wycliffe, if it

ever existed, must have been completely destroyed.

  Now on the first of these points, Father Gasquet seems to

ignore the strength of the evidence Avhich connects Wycliffe and

                   * In the Dublin Review, July 1894.
                THE ENGLISH MANUSCBIPT BIBLES.          205

his supporters, not merely with a translation of the Bible, but with

                    these translations. That they were responsible

^               °^  ^^^ ^ translation is proved by the  contemporary

   thTM^h**°'^

                    evidence of Archbishop Arundel, Knyghton,

-- and a decree of the Council held at Oxford in 1408 all wit-

nesses hostile to the Wycliffites. If that translation is not the

one commonly known as the "Wycliffite Bible, then no trace of

it exists at present, which is in itself improbable. But of the

actually extant translations, the Old Testament in the earlier

version, as we have seen, is shown to be the work of Nicholas

Hereford by the evidence of the note in the Oxford manuscript;

while the later version is obviously based upon the earlier, and

was, moreover, certainly the work of some one who held identical

views with Purvey ; further, in a manuscript of the earlier ver-

sion at Dublin Purvey's own name is written as the owner, and

(what is more important) the prologues to the several books

commonly found in the later version have here been inserted in
Purvey's own writing. Father Gasquet says " whether Hereford

or Purvey possibly may have had any part in the translation

does not so much concern us " ; but he cannot seriously mean

to maintain that an authorised version of the English Bible,

existing (as on his theory it existed) in direct opposition to the

"Wycliffite Bible, could itself be the work of Hereford and Purvey,

the two most conspicuous adherents and companions of Wycliffe.

Moreover, the last words of the preface to the revised version

show that the author did not know how his work might be

received by those in power, and looked forward to the possibility
of being called upon to endure persecution for it : " God graunte

to us alle grace to kunne [understand] wel and kepe wel holi
writ, and suffre ioiefulli sum peyne for it at the laste." This

evidence, taken together with the proved connection of Here-

ford and Purvey with the extant translation, is sufficient to

establish that it is, as has always been believed, the Wycliffite

Bible.

On his second point, however, Father Gasquet's position is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;

      206 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

      much stronger. There is no doubt that the Lollards (as Wycliffe's

        followers were called) were persecuted, but it does not appear
       that the possession, use, or manufacture of an English version of
       the Bible was one of the charges specially urged against them.

       The subject is not raised in the extant list of articles upon
       which the suspected were to be questioned. One is glad that
       it should be so, that the leaders of the English Church should
      not have been hostile to an English Bible ; and one may accept
       Eather Gasquet's argument on this point with the more willing-
        ness, because it is fatal to his two remaining points. If the

        Lollards were not persecuted in connection with the English
        Bible, it is manifestly absurd to argue that the existing Bibles
       cannot have been written by them because they were persecuted
       and their writings destroyed. It is only in rhetorical passages
       that the picture has been drawn of the hunted Wycliffite writing
        his copy of the English Bible in his obscure cottage, in constant
        fear of surprise and arrest. Wycliffe always had strong sympa-
       thisers, notably John of Gaunt and the University of Oxford
        indeed, just as the University of Paris is identified with the

           )

    \ first French Bible, so is the University of Oxford closely as-
^ sociated with the first Bible in English; and with such support

            \

     ' Wycliffe can have had no difficulty in obtaining workmen to
       transcribe handsome and elaborate copies of his Bible. Nor
       need even those who most strongly opposed the socialistic and
        heretical opinions of Wycliffe have therefore refused to possess

         copies of his translation of the Scriptures, if the existence of
        such a translation formed no part of the cause of their hostility

       to him. Copies of the English version are known to have
       belonged to Henry YL, to Henry YIL, to Thomas of Woodstock,
       Duke of Gloucester, to Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, the
       founder of the University Library at Oxford, and to many
       rehgious houses ; and if it could be shown that the Wycliffite
        translation was an object of persecution by the leaders of the
       English Church, the public possession of such copies by noted
        supporters of the Church would unquestionably be difficult
              THE ENGLISH MANUSCEITT BIBLES.  207

to explain. But since Father Gasquet has shown that this

persecution did not take place, at any rate to the extent

that has been supposed, the rest of his case for distinguishing

the Wycliffite translation from the translations now extant

breaks down.

The fact would seem to be that the Lollards were persecuted,

but not their Bible. Such hostility as was shown to this was

only temporary, and was confined to a few persons, such as

Archbishop Arundel. Generally the translation was tolerated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;

and this is perfectly comprehensible, since the extant copies,

which we have seen to be connected with Hereford and Purvey,

show no traces of partisanship or of heretical doctrine. It is a

plain translation of the Latin text of the Scriptures then current,

without bias to either side : and, whatever Arundel might do,

other bishops, such as William of Wykeham (who was, moreover

a supporter of John of Gaunt), would not be likely to condemn

it. Nor would the tendency to toleration be less as time went

on, and when John of Gaunt's son, Henry IV., had succeeded to

the throne. If this be admitted, then the references (often very

vague) to an authorised or tolerated version, on which Father

Gasquet bases his fourth point, can be explained without calling

into existence a version other than that of Wyclifife and put

forward in its place by the Church.

It is not from any spirit of partisanship that we have argued

against Father Gasquet's novel and interesting theory. One

would gladly believe that the bishops and leaders of the English

Church in the fourteenth century did put forward an English

translation of the Scriptures for the use of their flocks, if there

were sufficient evidence to support such a view. Unfortunately,

We such evidence is not to be had.   know that Wycliffe and

his adherents prepared a translation ; we know that two of his
most prominent supporters, Hereford and Purvey, had at least

some connection with the translations which actually exist ; and
we can see no ground for refusing to take the further step, and

say that the Wyclilfite version and the existing translations
208 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

are one and the same thing. In any case Wycliffe has the
credit of having been the first to translate the entire Bible into
our native tongue ; and one would be glad that our Church and
nation should have the credit of having accepted so valuable
a work, and of having allowed copies of it to be multiplied and
to be preserved to the present day.
                       ( 209 )

                       CHAPTER XL

                THE ENGLISH PRINTED BIBLE.

IN" the fifteenth century, then, the Bible was circulating, to a

       limited extent, in the "Wycliffite translations, tolerated, though

not encouraged, by the powers of Church and State ; but the middle

of the century was barely passed, when two events took place which,

though totally unconnected with one another, by their joint effects

revolutionised the history of the Bible in Western Europe. In

May  1453  the  Turks  stormed  Constantinople                                                                   and  in  November
                                                                                                              ;

1454 the first known product of the printing press in Europe was

issued to the world. The importance of the latter event is obvious,

and has been already explained. Not only did the invention of

printing do away, once and for all, with the progressive corruption

of texts through the inevitable errors of copyists, but it also

rendered it possible to multiply copies to an indefinite extent and

to make learning accessible to every man who could read. Know-

ledge need no longer " rest in mounded heaps " in the monastic

libraries, but could freely "melt in many streams to fatten lower

lands." All that was required was that men should be found

willing and able to make use of the machinery which the discovery

of Gutenberg had put into their hands.

It was the other of the two events above recorded which, in

great measure, provided the inspiration that was needful in order

to make the invention of printing immediately fruitful. The

Turkish invasion of Europe, culminating in the capture of Con-

stantinople and the final fall of the Eastern Empire, drove to the

West numberless scholars, able and willing to teach the Greek

language to the people among whom they took refuge. Greek,

almost forgotten in Western Europe during many centuries, had

always been a living language in the East, and now, journeying

westwards, it met a fresh and eager spirit of inquiry, which

S 2764.
210 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

\velcomed joyfully the treasures of the incomparable literature

enshrined in that language. Above all, it brought to the West

the knowledge of the  N'ew  Testament in its original tongue                                                                                                                                          and
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ;

with the general zeal for knowledge came also a much increased

study of Hebrew, which was of equal value for the Old Testament.
Thus at the very moment when the printing press was ready to
spread instruction over the world a new learning was springing up,

which was only too glad to take advantage of the opportunity thus

jDresented to it.

   The revival of learning affected the Bible in three ways. In the

first place it led to a multiplication of copies of the then current
Bible, the Latin Vulgate. Next, and far more important, it pro-

duced a study of the Scriptures in their original languages ; and
though the Greek and Hebrew manuscripts then available were by

no means perfect, they at least served to coiTect and explain the

-- more coiTupt Latin. Finally the point with which we are
-- especially concerned in the present chapter, it promoted a desire

to make the Scrij^tures known to all classes of men directly, and
not through the medium of men's instruction ; and this could only

be done by having the Bible translated in each country into the

common language of the people. Especially was this the case in
the countries which, in the sixteenth century, broke away from the
domination of the Pope. The monasteries were corrupt, the

religious teaching, which was the special justification for their
existence, was often either false or nonexistent. The reformers

held that fhe best method of overthrowing the power of the

monasteries and of the Boman Church was to enable the
common people to read the Bible for themselves and learn how
much of the current teaching of the priest and friar had no
basis in the words of Scripture. The leaders of the Roman

Church, on the other hand, doubted the advisability of allowing the

Scriptures to be read by uneducated or half-educated folk, without

the accompaniment of oral instruction. Some of them may have
known that certain current practices could not be justified out
of the Bible ; others mav have feared that the reformers would
              THE ENGLISH PRINTED BIBLE.  211

introduce heretical teaching into their translations. So it fell out

that the struggle of the Reformation period was largely concerned

with the question of the translation of the Bible. In Germany the

popular version was made, once and for all, by the great reformer,

Luther ; but in England, where parties were more divided, the
translation of the Bible was the work of many years and many

hands. In this chapter we shall narrate the history of the

successive translations which were made in England, from the

invention of printing to the completion of the Authorised Version

in 1611, and in conclusion shall give some account of the Revised

Version of 1881-5.

   The true father of the English Bible is William Tyndale, who
was born in Gloucestershire about the year 1484. He was edu-

              cated at Oxford, Avhere he was a membei" of

li-vf^itl^k^  Magdalen Hall, then a dependency of Magdalen

              College. Here he may have begun his studies

of Biblical interpretation and of the Greek language under the

great leaders of the new learning at Oxford, Colet of Magdalen

and Grocyn of New College; but about 1510 the fame of

Erasmus, who was then teaching at Cambridge, drew him to the

sister University, where he stayed for several years. It was

while he was at Cambridge, or soon afterwards, that he formed

the resolve, to the accomplishment of which his whole subsequent

life was devoted, to translate the Bible into English ; saying, in

controversy with an opponent, " If God spare my life, ere many

years I will cause a boy that driveth the plough to know more
of the Scripture than thou doest." He had hoped that this '

might be accomplished under the patronage of the leaders of the

Church, notably Tunstall, Bishop of London, to whom he first

applied for countenance and support. Tunstall, however, refused
his apphcation, and although Humphrey Monmouth, an alderman

of London, took him into his house for several months, it was

not long before Tyndale understood "not only that there was

no room in my lord of London's palace to translate the New Testa-

ment, but also that there was no place to do it in all England."

                                                                                                                             2
    212 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

        Accordingly in 1524 he left England and took up his abode

    in the free city of Hamburg. Here his translation of the New

     Testament was completed, and in 1525 he transferred himself to
     Cologne in order to have it printed. j\Ieanwhile rumours of his

    work had got abroad. He was known to belong to the reforming

     party ; in translating the Bible he was following the example

    of Luther ; he may even have met Luther himself at Wittenburg,
     which is not far from Hamburg. His translation was probably

     part of a design to convert England to Lutheranism ; and clearly
     it must not be allowed to go forward if it were possible to stop
    it. The secret of the printing was, however, well kept ; and it
    was not until the printing had made considerable progress that
     CochlEeus, an active enemy of the Reformation, obtained the
     clue to it. Hearing boasts from certain printers at Cologne of
    the revolution that would shortly be made in England, he
    invited them to his house ; and having made them drunk, he
     learnt that three thousand copies of an English translation were
     being printed, and that some ten sheets of it had already leen
     struck off. Having, in this truly creditable manner, obtained the
     information he required, he at once set the authorities of the
     town in motion to stop the work ; but Tyndale secured the

    printed sheets and fled with them to Worms. At Worms

     he not only finished the edition partly printed at Cologne,
     which was in quarto form and accompanied by marginal notes,
     but also, knowing that a description of this edition had been
     sent by Cochlteus to England, in order that its importation
     might be stopped, had another edition struck off in octavo form
    and without notes.

        Both editions were completed in 1525, which may consequently

^1 be regarded as the birth-year of the English printed Bible,
     though it was probably not until the beginning of 152G

     that the first copies reached this country. Money for the work
     had been found by a number of English merchants, and by
     their means the copies were secretly conveyed into England,
     where they were eagerly bought and read on all sides. The
THE ENGLISH PSINTED BIBLE.           213

leaders of the Church, however, declared against the trans-

lation from the first. Archbishop "Warham, a good man and a

scholar, issued a mandate for its destruction. Tunstall preached
against it, declaring that he could produce 3000 errors in it.

Sir Thomas More wrote against it with much bitterness, charging

it with wilful mistranslation of ecclesiastical terms with heretical

intent. The book was solemnly burnt in London at Paul's Cross,
and the bishops subscribed money to buy up all copies obtain-
able from the printers ; a proceeding which Tyndale accepted
with equanimity, since the money thus obtained enabled him to
proceed with the work of printing translations of other parts

of the Bible.* At the same time one reprint of the New Testa-

ment after another was issued by Dutch printers, and, in spite
of all efforts of the Bishops, copies continued to pour into
England as fast as they were destroyed.

  The English New Testament was thns irrevocably launched

upon the world yet so keen was the search for copies, both
                                                                                     ;

* The account of this transaction given by the old chronicler Hall is very-

quaint. After describing ho"w a mercliant named Paekington, friendly to

Tyndale, introduced himself to Tunstall and offered to buy up copies of the

New Testament for him, he proceeds thus : " The Eishop, thinking he had

God by the toe, when indeed he had the devil by the fist, said, ' Gentle

Mr. Paekington, do your diligence and get them ; and with all my heart I

will pay for them whatsoever they cost you, for the books are erroneous and

nought, and I intend surely to destroy them all, anfl to burn them at Paul's

Cross.' Paekington came to William Tyndale and said, ' AVilliam, I know
thou art a poor man, and hast a heap of New Testaments and books by thee,

for the which thou hast both endangered thy friends and beggared thyself,

and I have now gotten thee a merchant which, with ready money, shall

despatch thee of all that thou hast, if you think it so profitable for yourself.'

' Who is the merchant?' said Tyndale. 'The Bishop of London,' said Paek-

ington. ' Oh, that is because he will burn them,' said Tyndale. * Yea, marry,'

quoth Paekington. ' I am the gladder,' said Tyndale, ' for these two benefits

shall come thereof: I shall get money to bring mj^self out of debt, and the

whole world will cry out against the burning of God's Word ; and the over-
plus of the money that shall remain to me shall make me more studious to
correct the said New Testament, and so newly to imprint the same once again,

and I trust the second will much better like you than ever did the first.' And

so forward went the bargain, the Bishop had the books, Paekington had the

thanks, and Tyndale had the money."  ^
    214 OUE BIBLE AXB THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

    , then and afterwards, and so complete the destruction of them,

    that barely a trace of these earliest editions remains to-day. Of

    ) the quarto edition, begun at Cologne and ended at Worms, only

      -- one. solitary fragment exists, containing Matt. 1. 1 22. 12. It

    1 is now in the Grenville collection in the British Museum, and

    \ from it is taken the half-page reproduced in Plate XXV., show-

              the beginning of the Sermon on the Mount. Of the octavo,

    Iionnge perfect copy exists in the library of the Baptist College at

    Bristol,* another, imperfect, in St. Paul's Cathedral. This is all

    that is left of the many thousand copies which poured from the

       press between 1526 and 1530.

    j

          Tyndale's New Testament differs from all those that preceded

    it in being a translation from the original Greek, and not from

    the Latin. He made use of such other materials as were avail-

    able to assist his judgment, namely, the Vulgate, the Latin

>J  translation which Erasmus published along with his Greek text,

    and the German translation of Luther ; but these were only

    subordinate aids, and his main authority was unquestionably the

    Greek text which had been published by Erasmus in 1516 and

    revised in 1522. This was a new departure, and some of the

    "mistakes" which Tunstall and others professed to find in

    Tyndale's work may have been merely cases in which the Greek

    gave a different sense from the Latin to which they were

    accustomed. The amount of actual errors in translation would

    not appear to be at all such as to justify the extremely hostile

    reception which the leaders of the Church gave to the English

    Bible. More may or may not have been right in holding that

    the old ecclesiastical terms, such as "church," "priest," "charity,"

    round which the associations of centuries had gathered, should
    not be set aside in favour of " congregation," " senior," " love,"

    and the like : there is much to be said on both sides of the

    question ; but certainly this was no just reason for proscribing
    the whole ti-anslation and assailing its author. Nor can such

       * This copy 'vras discovered in 1740 by an iigent of the Earl of Oxford,
    who bestowed on the fortunate discoverer an annuity of £20.
PLATE XXV.

                                                                                                                                               H s^

                                                         4

      1
                                         THE ENGLISH FEINTED BIBLE.             215

treatment be explained on the ground of Tyndale's marginal

comments, controversial though they unquestionably were, and,

in part, derived from those of Luther ; for measures were taken

to suppress the book before its actual appearance, and the pro-

scription was not confined to the quarto, which alone contained

the comments, but was extended to the octavo, in which the

sacred text stood by itself. The reception which the heads of

the English Church, Henry VIII. included, gave to Tyndale's

Testament can only be attributed to a dislike of the very existence

of an English Bible.

  Tyndale's labours did not cease with the appearance of his New

Testament. His hope was to complete the translation of the

whole  Bible                             and  although other works, chiefly of  a controversial
                                      ;

character, occupied some portion of his time, he now set himself to

work on the Old Testament. The first instalment occupied him

for four years, and in 1530 the Pentateuch issued from the press,

accompanied by strongly controversial marginal notes. The five

books must have been separately printed, since Genesis and Num-

bers are printed in black letter, and the others in Roman (or

ordinary) type ; but there is no sufficient evidence of separate pub-
lication. The Pentateuch was followed in 1531 by the Book of

Jonah, of which only one copy is now known to exist. But Tyndale
had not said his last Avord on the New Testament. Like a good

scholar, he was as fully aware as his critics could be that his version

admitted of improvement, and he undertook a full and deUberate

revision of it, striving especially after a more exact correspondence

with the Greek. The publication of his labours was hastened by

the appearance of an unauthorised revision in 1534, the work of

one George Joye. Since the original publication in 1526, the

printers of x\ntwerp had been issuing successive reprints of it, each

less correct than its predecessor, and at last Joye had consented to

revise a new edition for the press. Joye had taken Tyndale's

version, altered it considerably, especially by comparison with the

Latin Vulgate, had introduced variations of translation in accor-

dance with his own theological opinions, and had published the
216 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

whole without any indication of a change of authorship. Tyndale

was    justly  indignant  at  this                      act  of  combined  piracy  and  fraud
                                                                                                                 ;

but his best antidote was found in the publication of his own

revised edition in the autumn of the same year. It is this edition

of 1534 which is the true climax of Tyndale's work on the New

Testament. The text had been diligently corrected ; introductions

Avere  prefixed to  each  book                          the  marginal  commentary       was  re-
                                                     ;

written in a less controversial spirit ; and at the end of the

volume were appended certain extracts from the Old Testament
which were read as " Epistles " in the Church services for certain

days of the year.

With the appearance of this edition Tyndale's work was practi-

cally at an end. The battle was substantially won ; for although
he himself was held in no greater favour in England than before,

the feeling against an English Bible had considerably abated, and

the quarrel with Rome had reached an open rupture. Cromwell

and Cranmer were already convinced of the desirability of having

the Bible translated by authority ; and Tyndale was able to present
a magnificent copy of his new edition to Queen Anne Boleyn,*

who had constantly favoured the undertaking of the English Bible.

But the enmity of the Eomanist party against Tyndale himself

was not abated ; and his labom* for the diffusion of God's Word
was destined to receive the crown of martyrdom. He was now

residing at Antwerp, a free city, and was safe as an inmate of the

"English House," an established home of English merchants in

that city. But in 1535 a traitor, named Henry Philips, wormed
himself into his confidence and used his opportunity to betray him

into the hands of some officers of the Emperor Charles V., by

whom he was kidnapped and carried out of the city. The real

promoters of this shameful plot have never been known. It is

certain that Philips was well supplied with money, which must

have come from the Eomanist party, to which he belonged.

Henry VIII., who was now at open war with this party, can have

                    This copy is now in the British Museum,
                                                                                                           --

                   THE ENGLISH PRINTED BIBLE.                                                                                   217

had no share iu the treachery. The most that can be said against

him is that he took no steps to procure Tyndale's release.

Cromwell used his influence to some extent ; but from the moment

of the arrest, the prisoner's fate was certain. Charles Y. had set

himself to  crush  heresy  by  stringent laws                                                              and  there  was  no  doubt
                                                                                                        ;

that, from Charles's point of view, Tyndale was a heretic. After

a long imprisonment at Yilvorde, in Belgium, he was brought to

trial, and in October 1536 he suffered martyrdom by strangling at/ {^^
the stake and burning, praying with his last words, " Lord, openf

the King of England's eyes."

Before his arrest Tyndale had once more revised his New Testa-

ment, which passed through the j)ress during his imprisonment.

This edition, which appeared in 1535, differs little from that of

1534, and the same may be said of other reprints which appeared

in 1535 and 1536. These cannot have been supervised by Tyndale

himself, and the eccentricities in spelling which distinguish one of

them are probably due to Flemish compositors. "We shall see in

the following pages how his work lived after liim, and how his

translation is the direct ancestor of our Authorised Version. The

genius of Tyndale shows itself in the fact that he was able to

couch his translations in a language perfectly understanded of the

people and yet full of beauty and of dignity. If the language of

the Authorised Version has deeply affected our English prose, it

is to Tyndale that the praise is originally due. He formed the

A mould, which subsequent revisers did but modify.                                                                          specimen

of his work may fitly close our account of him.* It is his version

of Phil. 2. 5-13 as it appears in the edition of 1534, and readers
will at once recognise how much of the wording is familiar to us

in the rendering of the Authorised Version :

   " Let the same mynde be in you that was in Christ Jesu : which

beynge in the shape of God, and thought it not robbery to be

equall with God. Nevertheless, he made him silfe of no reputa-

cion, and toke on him the shape of a servaunte, and became lyke

   * Another specimen will be found in the Appendix, where it can be compared
with the versions of his successors.
218 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

unto men, and was found in his aparell as a man. He humbled
him silfe and became obedient unto deeth, even the deethe of the
crosse. Wherfore God hath exalted him, and geven him a name
above all names : that in the name of Jesu shuld every knee bowe,

bothe of thinges in heven and thinges in erth and thinges under

erth, and that all tonges shuld confesse that Jesus Christ is the

lorde unto the prayse of God the father. Wherefore, my dearly

beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not when I was present only,
but now moche more in myne absence, even so worke out youre
owne salvacion with feare and tremblynge. For it is God which

worketh in you, both the will and also the dede, even of good

will."

   Tyndale was burnt ; but he, with even greater right than
Latimer, might say that he had lighted such a candle, by God's

^- 9°7^^^?'it'^  grace, in England, as should never be put out.
  Bible, 1535.
                 His own New Testament had been ri^gorousl^y

                 excluded from England, so far as those in autho-

rity could exclude it ; but the cause for which he gave his
life was won. Even before his death he might have heard
that a Bible, partly founded on his own, had been issued in

England under the protection of the highest authorities. In

  1534 Convocation had petitioned the king to authorise a trans-
  lation of the Bible into English, and it was probably at this
  time that Cranmer proposed a scheme for a joint translation
  by nine or ten of the most learned bishops and other scholars.
  Cranmer's scheme came to nothing ; but Cromwell, now Secretary
  of State, incited Miles Coverdale to publish a work of translation
  on which he had been already engaged. Coverdale had known
  Tyndale abroad, and is said to have assisted him in his translation
(of the Pentateuch ; but he was no Greek or Hebrew scholar, and
  his version, which was printed abroad in 1535 and appeared in

England in that year or the next, professed only to be translated
from the Dutch [i.e. German] and Latin. Coverdale, a moderate,
tolerant, earnest man, claimed no originality, and expressly looked
forward to the Bible being more faithfully presented both " by the
THE ENGLISH PRINTED BIBLE.  219

ministration of other that begun it afore " (Tyndale) and by the
future scholars ^yho should follow him ; but his Bible has two
important claims on our interest. It was not expressly authorised,
but it was undertaken at the wish of Cromwell and dedicated to
Henry YIII ; so that it is the first English Bible which circulated

^ in England without let or hindrance from the higher powers. It

is'also the first complete English printed Bible, since Tyndale had /
not been able to finish the whole of the Old Testament, In the
Old Testament Coverdale depended mainly on the Swiss-German
version published by Zwingli and Leo Juda in 1524-1529, though
in the Pentateuch he also made considerable use of Tyndale's

translation. The New Testament is a careful revision of Tyndale

by comparison with the German. His task was consequently of a
secondary character, consisting of a- skilful selection from the
materials of others ; but such editorial work is far from being

^ unimportant, and many of Coverdale's phrases have passed into I

the Authorised Version. In one respect he departed markedly
from his predecessor, namely, in bringing back to the English
Bible the ecclesiastical terms which Tyndale had banished.

    In addition to the Bible issued in 1535-6, Coverdale, in 1538,

published a revised New Testament with the Latin in parallel

columns.* Meanwhile the demand for the Bible continued un-
abated, and a further step had been made in the direction of
securing official authorisation. Two revised editions were pub-
lished in 1537, and these bore the announcement that they were
" set forth with the king's most gracious license." The bishops in *"
Convocation might still discuss the expediency of allowing the
Scriptures to circulate in English, but the question had been
decided without them. The Bible circulated, and there could
be no returning to the old ways.

   * This was printed in England, but so inaccurately that Coverdale had a
second edition printed at once in Paris. This no doubt led to a coolness
with his English printer, Nycolson, of Southwark, who issued another edition,
also very inaccurate, substituting the name of " Johan Holly Lusho " for that
of Coverdale on the title page.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;

220 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

   Fresh translations, or, to speak more accurately, fresh revisions,
of the Bible now followed one another in quick succession. The

                         ·first to follow Coverdale's was that which is
    \^f^}tll^ I known as Matthew's Bible, but which is in fact

        Bible, 1537. '

                         the completion of Tyndale's work. Tyndale had

only publisKheecd the Pentateuch, Jonah, and the New Testament,

but he had never abandoned his work on the Old Testament, and
he had left behind him in manuscript a version of the books from
Joshua to 2 Chronicles. The person into whose hands this version
fell, and who was responsible for its publication, was John Rogers
and whether " Thomas Matthew," whose name stands at the foot
of the dedication, was an assistant of Eogers, or was Rogers him-
self under another name, has never been clearly ascertained.* The
Bible which Rogers published in 1537, at the expense of two
London merchants, consisted of Tyndale's version of Genesis to
2 Chronicles, Coverdale's for the rest of the Old Testament

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,

(including the Apocrypha), and Tyndale's New Testament accord-

ing to his final edition in 1535 ; the whole being very sHghtly
revised, and accompanied by introductions, summaries of chapters,
woodcuts, and cojiious marginal comments of a somewhat con-
tentious character. It was printed abroad, dedicated to Henry
VITL, and was cordially welcomed and promoted by Cranmer.
Cromwell himself, at Cranmer's request, presented it to Henry
and procured his permission for it to be sold publicly ; and so
it came about that Tyndale's translation, which Henry and all
the heads of the Church had in 1525 proscribed, was in 1537
sold in England by leave of Henry and through the active support
of the Secretary of State and the Archbishop of Canterbury.

   The English Bible had now been licensed, but it had not yet
been commanded to be read in Churches. That honour was

    * It has also been suggested that Matthew stands for Tyndale, to -nhom the
greater part of the translation was reallj- due. The appearance of Tyndale's
name on the title page would have made it impossible for Henry VIII. to
admit it into England without convicting himself of error in proscribing

Tyndale's New Testament.
                                 THE ENGLISH FEINTED BIBLE.                      221

reserved for a new revision which Cromwell (perhaps anxious

^.. lest the substantial identity of Matthew's Bible

,,Bi^b^lJe¥, r1£6539!-^1*5.4,1.   with Tyndale's, and the controversial          character

                                 »

                                                                             ·'

                                 of the notes, should come to the king's

knowledge) Vmployed Coverdale to make on the basis of

Matthew's Bible. The printing was begun in Paris in 1538,

but before it was completed came an order from the French

king, forbidding the work to proceed and confiscating the

printed sheets. Coverdale, however, rescued a great number of

the sheets, conveyed printers, presses, and type to London, and

there completed the work, of which Cromwell thereupon ordered

that a copy should be put up in some convenient place in every

church. The Bible thus issued in the spring of 1539 is a splen-

didly printed volume of large size, from which characteristic its

popular name was derived. In contents, it is Matthew's Bible

revised throughout, the Old Testament especially being consider-

ably altered in accordance with Miinster's Latin version, which

was greatly superior to the Zurich Bible on which Coverdale had

relied in preparing his own translation. The New Testament was

also revised, with special reference to the Latin version of Eras-

mus. Coverdale's characteristic style of working was thus ex-

hibited again in the formation of the Great Bible. He did not

attempt to contribute independent work of his own, but took the

best materials which were available at the time and combined

them according to his own editorial judgment. He was an editor,

and a very judicious one, not a translator.

In accordance with Cromwell's order, copies of the Great Bible

were set up in every Church ; and we have a curious picture of the
eagerness with which people flocked to make acquaintance with

the English Scriptures in the complaint of Bishop Bonner that

"diverse wilful and unlearned persons inconsiderately and in-

discreetly read the same, esjxicially and chiefly at the time of
divine service, yea in the time and declaration of the word of God."

One can picture to oneself the great length of Old St. Paul's

(of which the bishop is speaking) with the preacher haranguing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;

222 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

from the pulpit at one end, while elsewhere eager volunteers
are reading from the sis volumes of the English Bible which
Bonner had put up in different parts of the cathedral, surrounded
by crowds of listeners who, regardless of the order of divine

service, are far more anxious to hear the Word of God itself than

expositions of it by the preacher in the pulpit. Over all the land
copies of the Bible spread and multiphed, so that a contemporary
witness testifies that it had entirely superseded the old romances
as the favourite reading of the people. Edition after edition was
required from the press. The first had appeared in 1539 ; a
second (in which the books of the Prophets had again been
considerably revised by Coverdale) followed in April 1540, with a
preface by Cranmer, and a third in July. In that month Crom-
well was overthrown and executed ; but the progress of the Bible
was not checked. Another edition appeared in November, and
on the title-page was the authorisation of Bishop Tunstall of

London, who had thus lived to sanction a revised form of the
very work which, as originally issued by Tyndale, he had formerly
proscribed and burnt. Three more editions appeared in 1541, all

substantially reproducing the revision of April 1540, though with
some variations ; and by this time the immediate demand for
copies had been satisfied, and the work alike of printing and of

revising the Bible came for the moment to a pause.*
   It is from the time of the Great Bible that we may fairly date

the origin of the love and knowledge of the Bible which has
characterised, and which still characterises, the English nation.
The successive issues of Tyndale's translation had been largely
wasted in providing fuel for the opponents of the Eeformation
but every copy of the seven editions of the Great Bible found, not
merely a single reader, but a congregation of readers. The Bible

   * Several of the editions of the Great Bible were printed by Whitchurch,
and it is under the name of Whitchurch's Bible that the rules laid down for
the guidance of the revisers of 1611 refer to it. The rule (which instructs the
revisers to refer to "Tindale's, Matthew's, Coverdale's, Wliitchurch's " and the

" Geneva" translations) is quoted in the preface to the Revised New Testament

of 1881.
                   THE ENGLISH PBI^TED BIBLE.                                                                                                          223

took hold of the people, superseding,, as we have seen, the most

popular romances ; and through the rest of the sixteenth and the

seventeenth centuries the extent to which it had sunk into their

hearts is seen in their speech, their writings, and even in the daily

strife of politics. And one portion of the Great Bible has had a
deeper and more enduring influence still. When the first Prayer

Book of Edward VI. was drawn up, directions were given in it for

the  use  of  the  Psalms  from  the  Great Bible                                                      and from that day
                                                                                                    ;

to this the Psalter of the Great Bible has held its place in our

Book of Common Prayer. Just as, eleven hundred years before, *

Jerome's rendering of the Psalter from the Hebrew failed to

supersede his slightly revised edition of the Old Latin Psalms,

to which the ears of men were accustomed, so the more correct

translation of the Authorised Version has never driven out the

more familiar Prayer-Book version which we have received from

the Great Bible.   It  may be, it     certainly is, less                                               accurate                                        but it
                                                                                                                                                    ;

is smoother in diction, more evenly balanced for purposes of

chanting ; above all, it has become so minutely familiar to us

in every verse and phrase that the loss of old associations, which

its abandonment would produce, would more than counterbalance

the advantage of any gain in accuracy.

One other translation should be noticed in this place for com-

pleteness sake, although it had no effect on the subsequent history

                   of the English Bible. This was the Bible of R.

     Bible 1539.   Taverner, an Oxford scholar, who undertook an

                   independent revision of Matthew's Bible at the

same time as Coverdale was preparing the first edition of the

Great Bible under Cromwell's auspices. Taverner was a good

Greek scholar, but not a Hebraist ; consequently the best part of

his work is the revision of the New Testament, in which he intro-

duces not a few changes for the better. The Old Testament is

more slightly revised, chiefly with reference to the Vulgate.

Taverner's Bible appeared in 1539, and was once reprinted ; but

it was entirely superseded for general use by the authorised Great

Bible, and exercised no influence upon later translations.
224 OVR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

/ The closing years of Henry's reign were marked by a reaction

against the principles of the Reformation. Although he had

                   thrown off the supremacy of the Pope, he was by

 6. The Geneva     no means favourably disposed towards the teach-

Bible, 1557-1560.                ,                     ,  .i

                   ings and practices of the Protestant leaders, either

at home or abroad ; and aft'er the fall of Cromwell his distrust of

them took a more marked form. In 1543 all translations of the

Bible  bearing     the name  of  Tyndale were ordered  to be destroyed
                                                                                                                             ;

all notes or comments in other Bibles were to be obliterated ; and

the common people were forbidden to read any part of the Bible

either in public or in private. In 1546 Coverdale's N"ew Testament

was joined in the same condemnation with Tyndale's, and a great

destruction of these earlier Testaments then took place. Thus not

only was the work of making fresh translations suspended for

several years, but the continued existence of those which had been

\ previously made seemed to be in danger.

The accession of Edward YI. in 1547 removed this danger,

and during his reign the Bible was frequently reprinted ; but

no new translation or revision made its appearance. It is true

that Sir John Cheke, whose memory is preserved by Milton, as

having "taught Cambridge and King Edward Greek," prepared

a translation of St. Matthew and part of St. Mark, in which he

avoided, as far as possible, the use of all words not English
in origin, substituting (for example) " gainrising " for " resurrec-

tion" and "biword" for "parable"; but this version was not
printed, and remains as a mere linguistic curiosity. Under Mary

it was not likely that the work of translation would make any
progress. Two of the men most intimately associated with the

previous versions, Cranmer and Eogers, were burnt at the stake,

and Coverdale (who under Edward YI. had become Bishop of

Exeter) escaped with difficulty. The public use of the English

Bible was forbidden, and copies were removed from the churches ;
but beyond this no special destruction of the Bible was attempted.

Meanwhile the fugitives from the persecution of England were

gathering beyond sea, and the more advanced and earnest among
                                                                     .

          THE ENGLISH PRINTED BIBLE.          225

them were soon attracted by the influence of Calvin to a congenial
home at Geneva. Here the interrupted task of perfecting the
English Bible was resumed. The place was very favourable for

the purpose. Geneva was the home, not only of Calvin, but of

Beza, the most prominent Biblical scholar then living. Thought

was free, and no considerations of state policy or expediency need

affect the translators. Since the last revision of the English

translation much had been done, both by Beza and by others, to

A impro'^'e and elucidate the Bible text.  company of Frenchmen

was already at work in Geneva on the production of a revised

translation of the French Bible, which eventually became the

standard version for the Protestants of that country. Amid such

surroundings a body of English scholars took in hand the task of

revising the Great Bible. The first-fruits of this activity was the

New Testament of "W. Whittingham, brother-in-law of Calvin's

wife and a Fellow of All Souls' College, Oxford, which was printed

in 1557 ; but this was soon superseded by a more comprehensive
and complete revision of the whole Bible by Whittingham

himself and a group of other scholars. Taking for their basis

the Great Bible in the Old Testament, and Tyndale's last

revision in the New, they revised the whole with much care

and scholarship. In the Old Testament the changes introduced

are chiefly in the Prophetical Books and the Hagiographa, and

consist for the most part of closer approximations to the original

Hebrew. In the New Testament they took Beza's Latin transla-

tion and commentary as their guide, and by far the greater

number of the changes in this part of the Bible are traceable to

his influence. The whole Bible was accompanied by explanatory

comments in the margin, of a somewhat Calvinistic character, but

without any excessive violence or partisanship. The division of       --^>
chapters into verses, which had been introduced by Whittingham
from Stephanus's edition of 1551, was here for the first time        I

adopted for the whole English Bible. In all previous translations

the division had been into paragraphs, as in our present Revised

Version.

S 2764.                                    P
226 OUE BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

Next to Tjndale, the authors of the Geneva Bible have exercised

the most marked influence of all the early translators on the

Authorised Version. Their own scholarship, both in Hebrew and

in Greek, seems to have been sound and sober ; and Beza, their

principal guide in the New Testament, was unsurpassed in his own
day as an interpreter of the sacred text. Printed in legible Roman

type and in a convenient quarto form, and accompanied by an

intelligible and sensible commentary, the Geneva Bible (either as

originally published in 1560, or with the New Testament further

revised by Tomson, in fuller harmony with Beza's views, in 1576)

      became the Bible of the household, as the Great Bible was the

a Bible of the church. It was never authorised for use in churches,
      but it was cordially received by the heads of the English Church,

and until the final victory of King James's Version it was by far
the most popular Bible in England for private reading ; and many

of its improvements, in phrase or in interpretation, w^ere adopted

in the Authorised Version.

"With the accession of Elizabeth a new day dawned for the Bible

in England. The public reading of it was naturally restored, and

                       the clergy were required once more to have a

             Bishops'  copy of the Great Bible placed in their churches,
"^'J^^                 ^ -^  ^

   Bible, 1568.

                       which all inight read with due order and rever-

ence. But the publication of the Geneva Bible made it impossible

for the Great Bible to maintain its position as the authorised form

of the English Scriptures. The superior correctness of the Geneva

version threw discredit on the official Bible ; and yet, being itself the

Bible of one particular party ifi the Church, and reflecting in its

commentary the views of that party, it could not properly be

adopted as the universal Bible for public service. The necessity

of a revision of the Great Bible was therefore obvious, and it

happened that the Archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Parker,

was himself a textual scholar, a collector of manuscripts, an editor

of learned works, and consequently fitted to take up the task

which lay ready to his hand. Accordingly, about the year 1563,

he set on foot a scheme for the revision of the Bible by a
                   THE ENGLISH FEINTED BIBLE.                                       227

number of scholars working separately. Portions of the Bible

were assigned to each of the selected divines for revision, the

Archbishop reserving for himself the task of editing the whole

A and passing it through the press,            considerable number of the

selected revisers were bishops,* and hence the result of their

labours obtained the name of the Bishops' Bible.

The Bishops' Bible was published in 1568, and it at once

superseded the Great Bible for official use in churches. No

edition of the earlier text was printed after 1569, and the

mandate of Convocation for the provision of the new version in

all churches and bishops' palaces must have eventually secured its

general use in public services. Nevertheless, on the whole, the

revision cannot be considered a success, and the Geneva Bible

continued to be preferred as the Bible of the household and the

individual. In the forty-three years which elapsed before the

appearance of the Authorised Version, nearly 120 editions of

the Geneva Bible issued from the press, as against twenty of the

Bishops' Bible, and while the former are mostly of small compass,

the latter are mainly the large volumes which would be used in

churches. The method of revision did not conduce to uniformity

of results. There was, apparently, no habitual consultation be-

tween the several revisers. Each carried out his own assigned

portion of the task, subject only to the general supervision of the

Archbishop. The natural result is a considerable amount of

unevenness. The historical books of the Old Testament were

comparatively little altered ; in the remaining books changes were

much more frequent, but they are not always happy or even
correct. The New Testament portion was better done, Greek

being apparently better known by the revisers than Hebrew.

Like almost all its predecessors, the Bishops' Bible was provided

   * Alley, Bishop of Exeter ; Davies, Bishop of St. David's ; Sandys, Bishop
of Worcester; Home, Bishop of Winchester; Bentham, Bishop of Lichfield

and Coventry; Grindal, Bishop of London; Parkhurst, Bishop of Norwich;

Coxe,  Bishop  of  Ely                         and Guest, Bishop of Eochester.  The othtr revisers
                                            ;

·were Pearson, Canon of CanterLurj'; Perne, Canon of Ely; Goodman, Dean of

Westminster ; and Giles Lawrence.

                                                                                P2
    228 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

    with a marginal commentary, on a rather smaller scale than that

    A in the Geneva Bible.  second edition was published in 1572, in

    which the New Testament was once more revised, while the Old

    Testament was left untouched ; but the total demand for the

    Bishops' Bible, being probably confined to the copies required for

    public purposes, can never have been very great.

    Meanwhile the zeal of the reformed churches for the possession

    of the Bible in their own languages drove the Eomanists into

    ^, .              competition with them in the production of trans-
                      lations. For each of the principal provinces of
,( and Douai Bible,   the Latin Church a translation was provided con-
/(
    1582-1609

)

    formable to the views of that Church on the text and interpretation

    of Scripture. It was not that the heads of the Roman Church

    believed such translations to be in themselves desirable ; but since

    there was evidently an iiTepressible popular demand for them, it

    was clearly advisable, from the Roman point of view, that the

    translated Bible should be accompanied by a commentary in

    accordance with Roman teaching, rather than by that of the

    Genevan Calvinists or the EngMsh bishops. The preparation of

    an English version naturally fell to the scholars of the English

    seminary which had lately been established in France. The ori-

    ginal home of this seminary was at Douai, but in 1578 it was

    transferred  for  a  time to  Rheims                                      and it was during the sojourn
                                                                           ;

    at Rheims that the first part of the English Bible was produced.

    This was the New Testament, which was published in 1582. The

    Old Testament did not appear until 1609, when the seminary had

    returned to Douai ; and consequently the completed Bible goes by

    the name of the Rheims and Douai version.

    The most important point to observe about this Roman Catholic

    Bible is that the translation is made, not from the original

    Hebrew and Greek, but from the Latin Vulgate. This was done

    deliberately, on the ground that the Vulgate was the Bible of

    Jerome and Augustine, that it had ever since been used in the

    Church, and that its text was preferable to the Greek wherever the

    two differed, because the Greek text had been corrupted by
            THE ENGLISH FEINTED BIBLE.  229

heretics. Furthermore, the translators (of whom the chijef was

Gregory Martin, formerly Fellow .of St. John's College, Oxford)

held it their duty to adhere as closely as possible to the Latin

words, even when the Latin was unintelligible. Bishop Westcott
quotes an extraordinary instance in Ps, 57. 10 : " Before your

thorns did understand the old briar : as living so in wrath he

swalloweth them." The general result is that the translation is

almost always stiff and awkward, and not unfrequently meaning-

less. As a contribution to the interpretation of Scripture it is

practically valueless ; but, on the other hand, its systematic use of
words and technical phrases taken directly from the Latin ha^ had

a considerable influence on our Authorised Version. Many of the

words derived from the Latin which occur in our Bible were

incoi-porated into it from the Eheims New Testament.

   The Eomanist Bible had no general success, and its circulation

was not large. The New Testament was reprinted thrice between

1582 and 1750 ; the Old Testament only once. Curiously enough,

the greater part of its circulation was in the pages of a Protestant

controversialist, Fulke, who printed the Rheims and the Bishops'
New Testaments side by side, and also appended to the Eheims

commentary a refutation by himself, Fulke's work had a con^

siderable popularity, and it is possibly to the wider knowledge of

the Eheims version thus produced that we owe the use made of it

by the scholars who prepared the Authorised Version : to which
version, after our long and varied wanderings, we are now at

last come.

The attempt of Archbishop Parker and the Elizabethan bishops

to provide a universally satisfactory Bible had failed. The

            Bishops' Bible had replaced the Great Bible for

9. The Authorised ^gg jj^ churches, and that was all. It had not
Version.    '

            superseded the Geneva Bible in private use ; and

faults and inequalities in it were visible to all scholars. For the

remaining years of Elizabeth's reign it held its own ; but in the

settlement of religion which followed the accession of James I.,

the provision of a new Bible held a prominent place. At the
230 OUR BIBLE AND THE AKCIEXT MANUSCEITTS.

Hampton Court Conference in 1604, to which bishops and Puritan

clergy were ahke invited by James in order to confer on the

subject of religious toleration, Dr. Reynolds, President of Corpus

Christi College, Oxford, raised the subject of the imperfection of

the current Bibles. Bancroft, Bishop of London, supported him ;
and although the Conference itself arrived at iio conclusion on

this or any other subject, the King had become interested in the

matter, and a scheme was formulated shortly afterwards for

carrying the revision into effect- It appears to have been James

himself who suggested the leading features of the scheme ; namely,

that the revision should be executed mainly by the Universities ;
that it should be approved by the bishops and most learned of the

Church, by the Privy Council, and by the king himself, so that all

the Church should be concerned in it ; and that it should haVe no

marginal commentary, which might render it the Bible of a party

only.  To James were also submitted the names of the revisers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;

and it is no more than justice to a king whose political miscon-

ceptions and mismanagements have left hitti with a very indifferent

character among English students of history, to allow that the

good sense on which he prided himself seems to have been

conspicuously manifested in respect of the preparation of the

Authorised Version, which, by reason of its after effects, Hay

fairly be considered the most important event of his reign.

   It was in 1604 that the scheme of the revision was drawn Up,

and some of the revisers may have begun work upon it privately

at this time ; but it was not until 1607 that the task was formally
taken in hand. The body of revisers was a strong one. It in-

cluded the professors of Hebrew and Greek at both Universities,

with practically all the leading scholars and divines of the day.

There is a slight uncertainty about some of the names, and some

changes in the list may have been caused by death or retirement,

but the total number of revisers was from forty-eight to fifty.

These were divided into six groups, of which two sat at West-

minster, two at Oxford, and two at Cambridge. In the first

instance each group worked separately, having a special part of
                                                   THE ENGLISH PRINTED BIBLE.                                                                                                                                                                                                       281

the Bible assigned to it. The two Westminster groups revised
-- -- Genesis 2 Kings, and Romans Jude ; the Oxford groups

-- Isaiah  Malachi,                                and  the     Gospels,      Acts,                                                                                                                              and  Apocalypse                                                    while
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ;

-- those at Cambridge undertook 1 Chronicles -Ecclesiastes and

the Apocrypha. Elaborate instructions were drawn up for theii;

guidance, probably by Bancroft, The basis of the revision was to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,

be the Bishops' Bible ; the old ecclesiastical terms (about which

Tyndale and More had so vehemently disagreed) were to be

retained ; no marginal notes were to be affixed, except necessary

explanation of Hebrew and Greek words                                                                                                                                                                            when any company had
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ;

finished the revision of a book, it was to be sent to all the rest for

their criticism and suggestions, ultimate differences of opinion to

be settled at a general meeting of the chief members of each

company                                            learned men  outside  the  board of                                                                                                                                revisers were to be
                                                ;

invited to give their opinions, especially in cases of particular

difficulty.

   With these regulations to secure careful and repeated revision,
the work was earnestly taken in hand. It occupied two years
and nine months of strenuous toil, the last nine months being <
taken up by a final revision by a committee consisting of two
members from each centre; and in the year l6ll the result
of the revisets' labours issued from the press. It was at once
attacked by Dr. Hugh Broughton, a Biblical scholar of great
eminence and eradition, who had been omitted from the list
of revisers on account of his violent and impracticable dis-

position. His disappointment vented itself in a very hostile
criticism of the new version ; but this had very little effect, and
the general reception of the revised Bible seems to have been
eminently favourable. Though there is no record whatever of
any decree ordaining its use, by either King, Parliament, or
Convocation, the words "appointed to be read in churches"
appear on its title-page ; and there can be no doubt that it
at once superseded the Bishops' Bible (which was not reprinted

after 1G06) as the official version of the Scriptures for public

service. Against the Geneva Bible it had a sharper struggle, and
                                                                      ;

232 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCFIPTS.

for nearly half a century the two versions existed side by side in

private use. From the first, however, the version of 1611 seems

to have been received into popular favour, and the reprints of it

far outnumber those of its rival. It cannot have been authority

in high places of Church or State that caused the final victory of

the new version ; for the Geneva version had outlived the com-

petition of the Bishops' Bible, and the period in which it finally

fell before King James's version was that in which Church and
State were overthrown. It was its superior merits, and its total

freedom from party or sectarian spirit, that secured the triumph

of the Authorised Version, which from the middle of the seven-

teenth century took its place as the undisputed Bible of the

English nation.

The causes of its superiority are not hard to understand. In

the first place, Greek and Hebrew scholarship had greatly in-

                 creased in England during the forty years which

Its excellence   ^iad.  passed  since  the  last  revision.  It is true that

and influence.          ^

                 the Greek text of the New Testament had not been

substantially improved in the interval, and was still very imperfect

but the chief concern of the revisers was not with the readings, but

with the interpretation of the Scriptures, and in this department of

scholarship great progress had been made. Secondly, the revision

was the work of no single man and of no single school. It was the

deliberate work of a large body of trained scholars and divines of
all classes and opinions, who had before them, for their guidance,
the labours of nearly a century of revision. The translation of the

Bible had passed out of the sphere of controversy. It was a national

undertaking, in which no one had any interest q,t heart save that

of producing the best possible version of the Scriptures. Thirdly,

the past forty years had been years of extraordinaiy growth in

-- English literature. Prose writers and poets Spenser, Sidney,
-- Hooker, Marlowe, Shakespeare, to name only the greatest had

combined to spread abroad a sense of literary style and to raise the

standard of literary taste. Under the influence, conscious or

unconscious, of mastere such as these, the revisers wrought out the
THE ENGLISH PRINTED BIBLE.  233

fine material left to them by Tyndale and his successors into the
splendid monument of Elizabethan prose which the Authorised
Version is universally admitted to be.

    Into the details of the revision it is hardly necessary to go far.

The earlier versions of which the revisers made most use were
those of Rheims and Geneva. Tyndale no doubt fixed the general
tone of the version more than any other translator, through the
transmission of his influence down to the Bishops' Bible, which
formed the basis of the revision ; but many improvements in
interpretation were taken from the Geneva Bible, and not a few
phrases and single words from that of Eheims. Indeed, no source
of information seems to have been left untried ; and the result Avas
a version at once more faithful to the original than any translation
that had preceded it, and finer as a work of literary art than any
translation either before or since. In the Old Testament the
Hebrew tone and manner have been admirably reproduced, and
have passed with the Authorised Version into much of our
literature. Even where the translation is wrong or the Hebrew
text corrupt, as in many passages of the Prophets or the last

chapter of Ecclesiastes, the splendid stateliness of the English

version makes us blind to the deficiency in the sense. And in
the New Testament, in particular, it is the simple truth that the 1 1^

English version is a far greater literary work than the original

Greek. The Greek of the New Testament is a language which

had passed its prime, and had lost its natural grace and infinite
adaptability. The English of the Authorised Version is the finest
specimen of our prose literature at a time when English prose wore
its stateliest and most majestic form.

   The influence of the Authorised Version, alike on our religion
and our literature, can never be exaggerated. Not only in the
great works of our theologians, the resonant prose of the' seven-

teenth-century Fathers of the English Church, but in the writings
of nearly every author, whether of prose or verse, the stamp of its
language is to be seen. Milton is full of it ; naturally, perhaps,
from the nature of his subjects, but still his practice shows his
234 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

sense of the artistic value of its style. So deeply has its language

entered into our common tongue, that one probably could not take

up a newspaper or read a single book in which some phrase was

iiot borrowed, consciously or unconsciously, from King James's

version. No master of style has been blind to its charms ; and

those who have recommended its study most strongly have often

been those who, like Carlyle and Matthew Arnold, were not pre-

pared to accept its teaching to the full.

But great as has been the literary value of the Authorised

Version, its religious significance has been greater still. For

nearly thtee centuries it has been the Bible, not merely of public

use, not merely of one sect or party, not even of a single country,

but of the whole nation and of every English-speaking country on

the face of the globe. It has been the literature of millions who

have read little else, it has been the guide of conduct to men and
women of every class in life and of every rank in learning and
education. No small part of the attachinent of the English

people to their national church is due to the common love borne

by every party and well-nigh every individual for the English

Bible. It was a national work in its creation, and it has been a

national treasure since its completion. It was the work, not of

one man, nor of one age, but of many labourers^ of diverse and

even opposing views, over a period of ninety years. It was

watered with the blood of martyrs, and its slow growth gave time

for the casting off of imperfections and for the full accotnplish-

ment of its destiny as the Bible of the English nation.

With the publication of the Authorised Version the history of

the English Bible closes for many a long year. Partly, no

T,,,he  .  ,        doubt, this was due to the troubled times which
        Authorised
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
Version accepted
                    came upon England in that generation and the
        *^ "* ·
                    next. When the constitutions of Church and

State alike were being cast into the melting-pot, when men

Avere beating their ploughshares into swords, and theif pruning-

hooks into spears, there was little time for nice discussions as

to the exact text of the Scriptures, and little peace for the labours
                 THE BEVISED VERSION.      235

of scholarship. But the main reason for this pause in the work

was that, for the moment, finality had been reached. The vereion

of 1611 was an adequate translation of the Greek and Hebrew

texts as they were then known to scholars. The scholarship of

the day was satisfied with it as it had been satisfied with no

version before it; and the common people found its language

appeal to them with a greater charm and dignity than that of

the Genevan version, to which they had been accustomed. As

time went on the Authorised Version acquired the prescriptive

right of age ; its rhythms became familiar to the ears of all
classes ; its language entered into our literature ; and Englishmen

became prouder of their Bible than of any of the creative works

of their own literature.

What, then, were the causes which led to the revision of this

beloved version within the present generation, after it had held

  ,,,,           its ground for nearly three hundred yeai'S ?

revision in our  They may be summed up in a single sentence :
                 The increase of our knowledge concerning the

original Hebrew and Greek texts, especially the latter. The

reader who will glance back at our history of the Greek texts in

-- Chapters YI. YlII. will see how much of our best knowledge

about the text of the New Testament has been acquired since the

date of the Authorised Version. Of all the manuscripts de-

scribed in Chapter YII. scarcely one was known to the scholars of

1611 ; of all the versions described in Chapter VIIL not one was
known except the Yulgate, and that mainly in late and corrupt

manuscripts. The editions of the Greek text chiefly used by the

translators of 1611 were those of Erasmus, Stephanus, and Beza
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ;

and these had been formed from a comparison of only a few

manuscripts, and those mostly of the latest period.* The trans-

lators used the best materials that they had to their hands, and

with good results, since their texts were substantially true, though

not in detail ; but since their time the materials have increased

D * Stpphanus consulted two good uncials,  and L, but only to a slight

extent.
236 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

enormously. New manuscripts have come to light, and all the

earliest copies have been minutely examined and discussed.

Many scholars have devoted years of their lives to the collection
of evidence bearing on the text of the New Testament ; and the

general result of these generations of study is to show that the text
used by the translators of 1611 is far from perfect.

   For two centuries scholars laboured on without pressing for a
revision of the English Bible, though small alterations were silently

                             introduced into it until late in the eighteenth
  10. The Revised cg^tury ; but in the middle of the present cen-

                         tury the discrepancies between the received and
the amended Greek texts became so many and so generally known
that the desirability of a revision became apparent. The dis-
covery of the Codex Sinaiticus, and the critical texts published by

Tischendorf and Tregelles, did much to bring this need home to
all who cared for the accuracy of the English Bible. Partial trans-

lations were published by individual scholars, which served a good
purpose in their own time, though they need not be described here,
since none of them exercised any direct influence on the Eevised
Version ; but the final result was that in 1870 decisive steps were
taken to secure an authoritative revision of the whole English
Bible in the light of tjie fullest modern knowledge and the best

Biblical scholarship.

   The history of the revision is told at sufficient length in the

preface to the Eevised Version of the New Testament. The

initiative was taken by the Convocation of the province of Canter-
bury. In February of the year 1870 a definite proi3osal was made
that a revision of the Authorised Version should be taken into

consideration. In May the broad principles of the revision were
laid down in a series of resolutions, and a committee of sixteen

members was appointed to execute the work, with power to add to
its numbers. The committee divided itself into two companies,
one for each Testament, and invitations were issued to all
the leading Biblical scholars of the United Kingdom to take
part in the work. The invitations were not confined to members
THE REVISED VERSION.  237

of the Church of England. The English Bible is the Bible of
Nonconformists as well as of the Established Church, and repre-
sentatives of the Nonconformist bodies took their seats among

the revisers- Thus were formed the two companies to whom the

Kevised Version is due. Each company consisted originally of
twenty-seven members, but deaths and resignations and new
appointments caused the exact numbers to vary from time to
time ; and it cannot be questioned that most of the leading
Biblical scholars of the day were included among them. Further,
when the work had barely begun, an invitation was sent to the
churches of America asking their co-operation ; and, in accord-
ance with this invitation, two companies were formed in America,

to whom all the results of the English companies were communi-

cated. The suggestions of the American revisers were carefully
and repeatedly considered, and those of their alterations on which,
they desired to insist, when they were not adopted by their EngHsh
colleagues, were recorded in an appendix to the published version.
The Revised Version is, consequently, the work not of the English
 Church alone, nor of the British Isles alone, but of all the English-
speaking churches throughout the world ; only the Roman Catho-
 lics taking no part in it,

    The methods of the revision left little to be desired in the
way of care and deliberation. The instructions to the Revisers
 (which are given in full in their preface) required them to intro-

 duce as few alterations as possible consistently with faithfulness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;

 to use in such alterations the language of the Authorised or earlier
 versions, where possible ; to go over their work twice, in the first
 revision deciding on alterations by simple majorities, but finally

 making or retaining no change except two-thirds of those present
 approved of it. Thus the Revised Version represents the deliberate

 opinions of a large majority of the best scholars of all English-
 speaking churches in the last quarter of the nineteenth century.

     It was on the twenty-second of June 1870 that the members

 of the New Testament Company, having first received the Holy
 Communion in Westminster Abbey, held theu' first meeting in the
238 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

Jerusalem Chamber ; the Old Testament Company entered on

their work eight days later. It was on the eleventh of November

1880 that the New Testament Revisers set their signatures to the

preface of their version, which finally issued from the press in

May 1881. The Old Testament preface is dated the tenth of

July 1884, and the entire Bible, with the exception of the

Apocrypha,* was published in May 1885. The New Testament

company records that it sat for about forty days in each year for

ten years. The Old Testament revision occupied 792 days in a

space of fourteen years. Whatever judgment be passed on the

merits of the Eevised Version, it cannot be held to have been

made precipitately, or without the fullest care and deliberation.

What, then, of the results ? Is the Eevised Version a worthy

successor to the Authorised Bible which has entered so deej^ly into

the life of Englishmen ? Has it added fresh perfection to that

glorious work, or has it laid hands rashly upon sacred things ?

What, in any case, are the characteristics of the revision of 1881-5

as compared with the version on which it is based ?

The first class of changes introduced in the Revised Version

consists of those which are due to a difference in the text

                             translated ; and these are most conspicuous and

                          °  ^^^^'^ important in the New Testament.  The

«iT Revised

Version:                     version of IGll was made from a Greek text

A. Changes in text. ,,       ,,  /.  ,.

                             formed by a comparison of very few manuscripts,

and those, for the most part, late (see p. 99). The version of

1881, on the other hand, was made from a Greek text based ujoon an

exhaustive examination, extending over some two centuries, of all

the best manuscripts in existence. In Dr. Hort and Dr. Scrivener

the New Testament Company possessed the two most learned

   * The revision of the Apocrypha -was not initiated by Convocation, but by the
University Presses, which commissioned a company, formed from the Old and

New Testament Companies, to undertake the work. Material for the revision

is comparatively scanty, but the Variorum Edition, by the Rev. C. J. Bfill, 1892,
is accepted both in England and in Germany as a very important contribution
to this branch of Biblical literature. As this sheet is finally going to press, the
Eevised Apocrypha is announced for immediate publication.
              THE BE VISED VEESION.                                     239

textual critics then alive ; and when it is remembered that no
change was finally accepted unless it had the support of two-thirds

of those present, it will be seen that the Greek text underlying the

Revised Version has very strong claims on our acceptance.* Xo

one edition of the Greek text was followed by the Revisers, each
reading being considered on its own merits ; but it is certain that
the edition and the textual theories of Drs, Westcott and Hort,

which were communicated to the Revisers in advance of the

publication of their volumes, had g, great influence on the text

ultimately adopted, while very many of their readings which were

not admitted into the text of the Revised Version, yet find a

place in the margin. The Greek text of the New Testament of

1881 has been estimated to differ from that of 1611 in no less

than 5,788 readings, of which about a quarter are held notably to

modify the subject-matter ; though even of these only a small
proportion can be considered as of first-rate importance. The

chief of these have been referred to on p. 3, but the reader who
wishes for a fuller list may compare the Authorised and Revised

readings  in  such passages  as :  Matt. 1. 25 ;  5. 44 ;  6. 13;   10. 3
                                                                                             ;

11. 23 ; 17. 21 ; 18. 11 ; 19. 17 ; 20. 22 ; 23. 14 ; 24, 36 ; 27. 35.

Mark 7. 19 ; 9. 44, 46, 49 ; 16. 28 ; 16. 9-20.            Luke     1.  28
                                                                                     ;

2. 14 ; 9. 35, 54, 55 ; 11. 2-4 ; 17. 36 ; 23. 15, 17.     John 4. 42
                                                                                                              ;

6. 3, 4 ; 6. 69 ; 7. 58--8. 11 ; 8. 59.  Acts 4. 25 ;      8. 37 ;      9. 5
                                                                                              ;

15. 18, 34 ; 18. 5, 17, 21 ; 20. 15 ; 24. 6-8 ; 28. 16, 29. Rom,

3. 9 ; 4. 19 ; 7. 6 ; 8. 1 ; 9, 28 ; 10. 15 ; 11. 6 ; 14. 6 ; 16. 5, 24.

1 Cor. 2. 1 ; 6. 20 ; 8. 7 ; 11. 24, 29 ; 15. 47. 2 Cor. 1. 20 ; 12. 1.
Gal. 3. 1, 17; 4. 7 ; 5. 1. Eph. 3. 9, 14; 5. 30. Phil. 1. 16, 17.
Col. 1. 2, 14; 2. 2, 18. 1 Thess. 1. 1. 1 Tim. 3. 3, 16 ; 6. 5, 19.
2 Tim. 1. 11. Heb. 7. 21. 1 Peter 4. 14. 1 John 4. 3 ; 5. 7, 8, 13.
Jude 23. Rev. 1.8, 11 ; 2.3 ; 5.10 ; 11.17 ; 14.5 ; 16.7 ; 21,24; 22. 14.

   * The Eevisers' Greek text has beep edited by Archdeacon Palmer at
Oxford, and Dr. Scrivener at Cambridge ; and it -would bo a great gain if this
could be adopted in our schools and universities as the standard text of the
Greek Testament, in place of the old " received text," -which every scholar

kno-ws to be imperfect.
240 OUR BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

This list, which any reader of the Variorum Bible may extend in-

definitely for himseK (with the advantage of having the evidence

for and against each change succinctly stated for him), contains

some of the more striking passages in which the Revised Version is

translated from a different Greek text from that used in the Autho-

rised Version, and few scholars will be found to deny that in nearly

every case the text of the Revised Version is certainly superior.

In the Old Testament the case is different. This is not because

the translators of the Old Testament in the Authorised Version

were more careful to select a correct text than their colleagues of

the New Testament, but simply because our knowledge of the Old

Testament text has not increased since that date to anything like the

extent that it has in respect of the New Testament. As we have

seen in the earlier chapters, all extant manuscripts of the Hebrew

Scriptures contain what is known as the Massoretic text, and they

do not greatly differ among themselves. Such differences of reading

as exist are traced by a collation of the early versions, e.g. the

Septuagint  or  the  Vulgate                                       but we know too  little  as  yet of  the
                                                                ;

character and history of these versions to follow them to any great

extent in preference to the Hebrew manuscripts. The Revisers,

therefore, had no choice but to translate, as a rule, from the

Massoretic text ; and consequently they were translating sub-
stantially the same text as that which the authors of King James's

Version had before them. This is one explanation of the fact,

which is obvious to every reader, that the Old Testament is much
less altered in the Revised Version than the New ; * and the

reader who wishes to learn the improvements which might be

introduced by a freer use of the ancient versions must be referred

to the notes in the Variorum Bible.

  A * well known example of an altered reading occurs in Isa. 9. 3 (the first

lesson for Christmas Day), " Thou hast multiplied the people and not increased

the joy ; they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest," etc. ; the
marginal reading being to him. In the Eevised Version these readings change
places, " his" (lit. to him) being in the text, and not in the margin. The note
in the Variorum Bible explains that in the Hebrew -both readings are pro-
nounced alike.
                THE BEVISED VERSION.     241

The situation is reversed when we come to consider the differ-

ences, not of text but of interpretation, between the Authorised

                Version and the Revised. Here the advance is

   interpretation, gi'^ater in the Old Testament than in the New,
                        and again the reason is plain. The translators

of the New Testament in the Authorised Version were gener-

ally able to interpret correctly the Greek text which they had

before them, and their work may, except in a few passages, be

taken as a faithful rendering of an imperfect text. On the other

hand, Hebrew was less well known in IGll than Greek, and the

passages in which the Authorised Version fails to represent the

original are far more numerous in the Old Testament than in the

New. The reader who will take the trouble to compare the

Authorised and Revised Versions of the prophetical and poetical

books will find a very considerable number of places in which the

latter has brought out the meaning of passages which in the former

were obscure. To some extent the same is the case with the

Epistles of St. Paul, where, if we miss much of the familiar

language of the Authorised Version, we yet find that the connec-

tion between the sentences and the general course of the argument

are brought out more clearly than before. But it is in the Old

Testament, in Job, in Ecclesiastes, in Isaiah and the other

Prophets, that the gain is most manifest, and no one who cares

for the meaning of what he reads can afford to neglect the light

thrown upon the obscure passages in these books by the Revised

Version.*

Besides differences in text and differences in interpretation, we

c. Changes in   ^"^ ^'^ ^^^® Revised Version very many differ-
                ences in language. By far the greater number
    langiiage.

of the changes introduced by the Revisers are of this class,

   * The most striking single passage in the New Testament where the Revised

Version has altered the interpretation of the Authorised Version is Acts 26. 28,

where for the familiar "almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian" we find

-- " With but little persuasion thou wouldest fain make me a Christian,"- un-

questionably a more correct translation of the Greek.

S 27<!4.                              Q
242 OUB BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCBIPTS.

and it is ou them that the general acceptance, or other-
wise, of the new translation very largely depends. Sometimes
these changes embody a slight change of meaning, or remove
a word which has acquired in course of time a meaning different
from that which it originally had. Such are the substitution of
" Sheol " or " Hades " for " hell," " condemnation " for " damna-
tion," and " love " for " charity " (notably in 1 Cor. 13). Others

are attempts at slightly greater accuracy in reproducing the pre-

cise tenses of the verbs used in the Greek, as when in John 17. 14
" the world hated them " is substituted for " the world hath hated
them." Others, again, are due to the attempt made to represent
the same Greek word, wherever it occurs, by the same English
word, so far as this is possible. The translators of the Authorised
Version were avowedly indifferent to this consideration ; or
rather, they deliberately did the reverse. Where there were two
or more good English equivalents for a Greek word, they
did not wish to seem to cast a slight upon one of them by
always using the other, and so they used both interchangeably.*

* See the Translators' Preface (unfortunately omitted from our ordinary

Bibles, but very rightly inserted in the Variorum Bible, p. xxiii.) : "Another

thing we think good to admonish thee of, gentle Reader, that we have not tied

ourselves to an uniformity of phrasing, or to an identity of words, as some

peradventure would wish that we had done, because they observe, that some

learned men somewhere have been as exact as they could that way. Truly,

that we might not vary from the sense of that which we had translated before,

if the word signified the same thing in both places, (for there be some words

that be not of the same sense every where,) we were especially careful, and

made a conscience, according to our duty. But that we should express the

same notion in  the same  particular word                                                                               as for example, if  we  translate  the
                                                                                                                     ;

Hebrew or Greek word once by purpose, never to call it intent ; if one where

journeying, never travelling ; if one where think, never suppose ; if one where

pain, never ache ; if one where joy, never gladness, &c. thus to mince the

matter, we thought to savour more of curiosity than wisdom, and that rather

it would breed scorn in the atheist, than bring profit to the godly reader. For

is the kingdom of God become words or syllables? "Why should we be in

bondage to them, if we may be free ? use one precisely, when we may use

Now another no less fit as commodiously ? . . .                                                                         if this happen in better times,

and upon so small occasions, we might justly feel hard censure, if generally we

should make verbal and unnecessary changings. We might also be charged
                                                             THE REVISED VERSION.                                                    24 o

The Revisers of 1881-5 took a diflfereht view of their duty.

Sometimes the point of the passage depends on the same or

diiferent words being used, and here it is misleading not to follow

the (Ireek closely. So much weight is laid on the exact words

of the Bible, so many false conclusions have been drawn from
its phrases by those who are not able to examine the meaning

of those phrases in the original Greek or Hebrew, that minute

accuracy in reproducing the exact language of the original is

highly desirable, if it can be had without violence to the idioms of
the English tongue. One special class of passages to which this

principle has been applied occurs in the first three Gospels. \\\

these the same events are often recorded in identical Avords, prov-

ing  that                                        the  three  narratives  have  some  common  origin                              but in
                                                                                                                              ;

the Authorised Version this identity is often obscured by the use

of different renderings of the same words in the various Gospels.
The Revisers have been careful to reproduce exactly the amount of

similarity or of divergence which is to be found in the original

(rreek of such passages.

What, then, is the final value of the Revised Version, and what

                                                      is to be in future its relation to the Authorised

 Revi£^d°Version! ^^ersion to which we have been so long accus-

                     tomed ? On the first appearance of the Revised

Xew Testament it was received with much unfavourable criticism.

(by scoffers) with some unequal dealing towanls a great number r)f gooil

English words. For as it is written of a certain great Philosopher, that he
should say, that those logs were happy that were made images to be wor-

shipped                                          for their fellows, as good as they, lay for blocks behind  the                  fire :  so
                                              ;

if we should say, as it were, unto certain words, .Stand up higher, have a place

in the Bible always; and to others of like quality, Get you hence, be banished

for ever ; we might be taxed peradvcnture with St. James s words, namely,
To be partial in ourselves, and judges of evil thoughts. Add hereunto, tliat
niceness in words was always counted the next step to trifling ; and so was to
be curious about names too : also that we cannot follow a better pattern for
elocution than God Himself; therefore He using divers words in His holy
writ, and indifferently for one thing in nature : we, if we will not be super-
stitious, may use the same liberty in our English versions out of Hchreiv and

Greek, for that copy or store tliat He hath given us."

     S 27C4.                                                                                                                     Jl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :

244 OUn BIBLE AND THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.

Dean Burgou of Chichester, occupying towards it much the
same position as Dr. Hugh Broughton in relation to the Author-

ised Version, assailed it \eheniently in the Quarterhj Review
Avith a series of articles, the unquestionable learning of which
was largely neutralised by the extravagance and intemper-
ance of their tone. The Dean, however, was not alone in his
dislike of the very numerous changes introduced by the Revisers
into the familiar language of the English Bible, and there was a
general unwillingness to adopt the new translation as a substitute

for the Authorised Version in common use. "When, four years

later, the revision of the Old Testament was put forth, the popular
verdict was more favourable. The improvements in interpretation
of obscure passages were obvious, while the changes of language
were less numerous ; moreover, the language of the Old Testament
books being less familiar than that of the Gospels, the changes in
it passed with less observation. Scholars, however, were not by
any means universally satisfied Avith it, and the reviews in the
principal magazines, such as the Qimrterhj and Eduihiirfili,
were not favourable. It must be remembered, however, that most
of the leading scholars of the countiy were members of the
revision companies, and that the reviews, as a rule, Avere neces-
sarily written by those who had not taken part in the Avork. The
grounds of criticism, in the case of both Testaments, Avere tAA'o-fold
either the critics objected on scientific grounds to the readings
adopted by the Revisers, or they protested against the numerous
changes in the language, as making the Revised Version less
suitable than its predecessor to be the Bible of the people. But

with respect to the first class of criticisms, it may fairly be

supposed that the opinion of the Revisers is entitled to greater
weight than that of their critics. In a Avork involving thousands

of details, concerning many hundreds of Avhicli the evidence is

nearly equally balanced, it was not to be supposed that a result
could be reached Avhich Avould satisfy in every point either ea(;h

member of the revision companies themselves, or each critic out-
side ; and consequently the less Aveight can be attached to the
                                                                 :

THE liEVISED VEliSION.-               245

fact that reviewers, who themseh'es had taken no direct part in

the work, found many passages on which their own opinion

differed from that to which the majority of the Revisers had
come. As regards the fitness of the new translation to be the Bible

of tlie people, that question will be decided neither by the Eevisers

nor their critics, but by the people ; and it is impossible as yet to

We forecast their ultimate \-erdict.  Avho have been brought u]»

entirely on the Authorised Version, to whom many of its phrases

are tiie most familiar words in our language, are hardly able to

judge fairly of tbe literary merits of the Revision. For a long

time, in any case, the two versions must exist side by side ; and it
will be a generation that has become familiar with both of them

that will decide whether or not the Revised Version is to supersede

the Authorised Version, as the Vulgate, after a long struggle,

superseded the Old Latin, and as the Authorised Version super-

seded the Bible of the Elizabethan Bishops.

  We So ends, for the present, the history of the English Bible.

have talked much in this book of divergent manuscripts, of

versions, of corruptions, of revisions. It is good to end with a

re-affirmation of that with which we began, and to remind the

reader that through all these variations of detail it is the same

unchanged Word of God that has come down to us. Men have

been careless at times of the exact form in which they had it

they are rightly jealous now for the utmost accuracy that it is

possible to attain. But Avhether men were careless or careful,

God has so ordered it that the substantial truths of the Christian

.story and the Christian faith have never been lost from His Word.

Men might draw from it false or imperfect conclusions of their

own ; but their little systems have arisen, have had their day
and ceased to be, while still, unchanged and unchangeable, the

AVord of the Tiord abideth for ever.
                                   :

               Al

MKXS OF TIIK KXC

Id in ill! tlic |)riiH'i[)!tl vers

A [on p. 203.  conipiuiso

li be t'oiiml in T\ ndak'. 'J

Testament, we find alrefulA

the other transhitions are

[ eopy ; the rest are from o

1537.   Great Bible (Crom-

               well's), 1539.

          God in tynie jiast
        many riiiR'Vsly iiiid
        ways, spake vnto tliu

        fatiiers l)y Prophetes

        hut in these last clayes
        he hath spoken vnto

        vs by hys awne sonne,

        whom lie hath made

        lieyre of all thinges,

        ))y' whom also he made

        tiie worlde. \\ hych

         (Sonne ) l)einge the

        brightnes of liys glory,

        and the very ymage
        of hys substance rul-
        ynge all thynges wyth
        the worde of fiys pow-
        er, hath by hys awne
        persun pourged oure
        synnes,and syttetli on

         liie righte liande of
        the maiestye on hye:

        beyiige so nioch more
         excellent then the an-
         gels, as he hath by in-
         Jierytaunce obteyned
       1 a more excellent name
         then they.

            For vnto whycli of
         the angels sayde he at
         eny tyine : Thou art

        my sonne, this daye

         have I Vjegotten ther

         And agayne: I will
         be ))is father, and lie
         shalbe my sonne. And
         agayne.whenhe bring-

         eth ni llie fyrst begot-
         ten sonne into the

         worlde, he sayih. And

          let all the angels of

         God worshyppe hym.
         And vnto the angels
         he sayth : He makelh

          hys angels spretes,
         and hys ministres a
          llamme of fyre. liut
          vnto the sonne he
          sayth : Thy seate (O
          GodJ shalbe for ever
          and ever. The scepter
          of thy kingdome is a
          ryght sceptei-. ThoiiT
          liast loved ryghtewes-
          nes, and hated ini-
          quyte. "Whcrforo.God,
          even thy God hathan-
           oyiited the witli the
          oyle of gladnes aboue

           tiiy felowes.
                                                                     A 1' r E \ D T X.

                                   SPHriMNXS OF TnH KXcajSII TIlAXSLATinxS OF 'I'HIO DIULK.                                                          j,.

M xn-mms This Tiililo i-onl.iiiis II.':., 1. l-ll :.- Iniilsliit.'.l in  .i.-.i  A I ii. CliaptiT XI.                        liniti.iii ..f 111.- siiL, p,,ss,m.- :i« it n|,p.'.ii-. in
                                                   the priii.-i|«il                                                                                                                             Ih.
                                                                                                                                                                                                llu'
Wvfiillit.. Hilil.'s \m> :,liv;i.ix L.-.-ii ;;iv.-n .>n p. L'lW.  A ...mpi.risni. ..f ll..-.' p;.-^.j;vs will illiisfraf,. lli.- tnitli of tlio stiijliiiiwil  l.M. iii.-i.l.' in tlu'  lli^.t

foumluti.ili of the Autlii.riM'.l V.-isloii is to 1... f.iiin.l in Tvii.lalf. 'I'll.- Wx.lillil.' ^.l·^i..ll^ stiiii.l Mpart. ami havi' lia.l no inflijKuCf upon snliM'qu.-iit translations     ;

New «. Inlt ill Tvn.lulp, fVfn in his .-atH.'st                   lin.l ahva.h 111.- .-a.li'lu-.-s an.l ill.' pliias.'S of IIib AutlKirisu.l V,e(aipill|. Maltln-w's Bililp ;riv,.s Tvnilal.-'s
                                   'IVsta.ni-nl.

vcrsimi as tinallv i-evis.'.l liv llini, ami all the oIIut lianslalions an- plaililv .milling- hill ivvisions of lllis ni.i.lcl. Tli.' oxtract from Tvn.lak' is lak,-ii fl-.aii

Fn's Mr. F.      fa.-Minil.' r.inilit of llir- Krislol .-opy ; ll,.. ivsl a.v from oii-iiials in ill.- Hiilisli Miis,-iini.

Tyiiaale. 1595.  Coverdale. 1535.  Matthew, 1537.

                                                                                                                             puvY.!!-, iiialiing )i            i.f  hokliiig nil UiiiiK-.
                                                                                                                             Kattoii or »iiiiies,
                                                                                                                                                               .-e  by the M'oi'.l .)[ Iii.s
                                                                                                                             Mlh on the il)
                                                                                                                             li.iiia.il ilieMaie:              -.1  I»TMi-i-. «hi-ii l.i-lin.l

                                                                                                                               rni tOMliiehollIi.

                                                                     Ihee with j- oyle o                                                                            li.a. hi.ti' ' Imi-il
                                                                     Kladnen alioue tii.v fel
INDEX.

^Ifrie, Archbishop, translation of       Bancroft, Bishop, probable author of
    O.T. by, 195.                            instructions for preparation of
                                             Authorised Version, 231.
African Latin version of Bible, 77, 78,
     167, 168.                           Barnabas, Epistle of, in Codex Sinai-

Akiba, Kabbi, his share in fixing            ticus, 124.
                                         Bede, his translation of St. John's
   Hebrew text of 0. T., 90.
Alcuin, revision of Vulgate by, 182-         Gospel, 191.
                                         Bengel, J. A., edition of Greek N. T.
     184.
Aldhelm, Bishop, his version of the          by, 117.

    Psalter, the first English transla-  Bentley, Richard, collections made
    tion from the Bible, 190.               by, for critical edition of Greek
Alclred, translates Gospels into Eng-        N. T., 116 ; for edition of Vulgate,
     lish, 193.
Alexandrian readings in N. T. 109,            171.
     110.
Alfred, King, translates parts of the    Beza, editions of Greek N. T. by,
    Bible, 192.                             99 ; owned Codd. Bezae and Claro-
America, participation of. in Revised        montanus, 139, 144; his influence
    Version, 237.                           on the Geneva Bible, 225, 226.
Apocrypha, books of, their character
    and history, 28, 50, 51; Syriac      Bishops' Bible, the, 226-228.
    version of, 74, 75 ; Latin version,  Bohairic version of 0. T., 76 ; of N. T.,
     78, 79.
Aquila,, Greek version of 0, T. by, 52.      160-162.
Arabic versions of N. T., 165.           Broughton, Dr. Hugh, attacks Autho-
Aramaic language, adopted by Jews
    after the Captivity, 29.                 rised Version, 231.
Armenian version of N. T., 164.          Burgon, Dean, his contributions to
Augustine, quotations by, from N. T.,
     167, 169.                               textual criticism of N. T., 119;
Authorised Version, the, 229-234.            attacks Revised Version, 244.

Babylon, Jewish school of Biblical       Caedmon, makes poetical paraphrase
                                             of Bible in English, 190.
     tradition at, 29, 30, 38.
            S 2764.                      Canon of 0. T,, formation of, 26-28.
                                         Chapter-division of Bible, made by

                                             Stephen Langton, 186.
                                         Charlemagne, invites Alcuin to revise

                                             Vulgate, 182 ; Golden Gospels of,
                                              183.
250  INDEX.

Cheke, Sir John, his translation of the
INDEX.                                    251

Daniel, Theodotion's version of, in-      Geneva Bible, the, 225, 226.
     corporated in Septuagint, 53.        Gheniza, receptacle for damaged He-

De Rossi, collection of readings of           brew MSS., 37,
   Hebrew MSS. by, 41.                    Golden Gospels of Charlemagne, the,

Diocletian, edict of, for destruction of       183, 184.
     Christian books, 96.                 Gospels, earliest translation of into

Douai 0. T., 228, 229.                        English, 193 ; the version of, in
                                              tenth century, 193-195.
Elzevir edition of Greek N. T., the
    "received" text On the Continent,     K Gothic version of 0. T., 77 ; of T.,

     99.                                       165.

England; MSS. of Vulgate current in,      Great Bible, the^ 221-223 ; Psalter of,
    178-181 ; derive ornamentation            retained in our Prayer-Book, 223.
   from Ireland, 178; and texts from
                                          Griesbach, J. J., edition of Greek N.T.
    Italy, 179, 180. Earliest transla-        by, 1 17; his classification of MSS., z6.
    tions of the Bible, 190. History of
    English Bible, 189-245.               Gwilliam, G. H., edition of Peshitto
Erasmus, edits first printed edition of       SyriaC by, 157, 158.

   Greek N. T., 98, 99.                   HagiograJ)ha, date of their adoption
Estienne, Robert. See Stephanus.
Ethiopic version of 0. T., 76, 77 ; of       into the Hebrew Canon of Scripture,

    N.T., 165.                                 28.
European Latin version of Bible, 78,      Harkleian Syriac version of N.T., 158.

     167, 169.                            Hartmut, Abbot, establishes school of
Eusebius of Csesarea, edition of Septu-
                                              St. Gall, 185.
   agint by, 56 ; MSS. of this edition,
   69 prepares copies of Greek Bible      Hebrew Bible, early printed editions,

                         ;                    41.

    for Constantine, 96.                  Hebrew characters, history of, 23.
                                          Hebrew language, history of, 25.
Fathers, use of quotations from, in       Hebrew manuscripts, regulations for
    textual criticism, 15, 105, 109.
                                              copying, 34; dates of, 35, 38, 40; old
Field, F., edition of Hexapla by, 56,         copies destroyed, 36, 37 ; the chief
                                             extant MSS., 39, 40.
    68, 70.
                                          Hebrew text of 0. T., history of, 29-
Firkowitzseh, dates of Hebrew MSS.
                                              36 ; instances of corruption, 87.
    falsified by, 40.                     Hereford, Nicholas, translates part of

Gasquet, Father, his theory as to             Wycliffite Bible, 200, 201.
    authorship of Wycliffite Bible,
    204-208.                              Hennas, the " Shepherd " of, in Codex

Gaunt, John of, supports Wycliffe,            Sinaiticus, 124.
                                          Hesychius of Alexandria, edition of
    199, 206.
                                             Septuagint by, 57 ; MSS. of this
Genesis, Cotton MS. of, 61 ; Bodleian
    MS., ib. ; Vienna MS., 63.                edition, 70.

                                          Hexapla, of Origen, 54-56.
                                          Holmes and Parsons, edition of Septu-

                                              agint, 68.
                                          Horner, G., edition of Bohairic ver-

                                              sion by, 161.
     .

252  INDEX.

Hort, Prof., his theory of textual                                                                                                                                                                                      Lucar, Cyril, presents Codex Alexan-
    criticism of N.T., 107-115, 119.                                                                                                                                                                                        drinus to Charles I., 128.

Howorth, Sir H., his attack on the                                                                                                                                                                                      Lucian of Samosata, edition of Septua-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           gint by, 57 ; MSS. of this edition,
   Massoretic text of the 0. T., 85, 90.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            69, 70.

Irenseus, quotations by, from N. T.,                                                                                                                                                                                    M^Clellan, J. B., edition of the Gos-
    105, 109, 167.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pels by, 120.
Irish MSS. of Vulgate, 177, 178;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Manuscripts : meaning of term, 5
    their illuminations, ib.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ;
Italian Latin version of Bible, 78,                                                                                                                                                                                         use of, in recovering true text, 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ;
     167, 169.                                                                                                                                                                                                              different forms of, 18-22. Uncial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and cursive MSS., 58, 59, 101-103.
James I., King, promotes Authorised                                                                                                                                                                                              for descriptions of individual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MSS., sec Codex ; also the follow-
    Version, 230.                                                                                                                                                                                                          ing:--
Jeremiah, different order of prophecies                                                                                                                                                                                            Anglo-Saxon Gospels, 194, 195.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Armenian MSS., 164.
    in Septuagint, 72.                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bible of Charlemagne, 182.
Jerome, St., his Latin version of the                                                                                                                                                                                               Bible of St. Hubert, l85.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bodleian Genesis, 61.
    Bible (the Vulgate), 79-83, 169-171.                                                                                                                                                                                                                Psalter, 62,
Job, Septuagint version of, shorter                                                                                                                                                                                                Bohairic MSS., 161.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bookof Kells, 178.
    than Hebrew, 53, 76; Old Latin                                                                                                                                                                                               British Museum MS. of Pen-
   version of, revised by Jerome, 8 1                                                                                                                                                                                                     tateuch, 39.
Jonathan ben Uzziel, Targum of, 30.                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cotton Genesis, 61.
Jubilees, Book of, supports Septuagint                                                                                                                                                                                              CuretonianSyriacMS.,153,155.
    text of Genesis against Hebrew, 88.                                                                                                                                                                                             Gothic MS., of Ulfilas, 165.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Harleian Gospels, 172.
 Kennicott, collection of readings of                                                                                                                                                                                               Lindisfarne Gospels, 172, 179-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           181, 193.
    HebrewMSS. by, 41.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Papyrus Psalter, 65.
Eri, readings in Hebrew text, 33.                                                                                                                                                                                                 Peshitto Syriac MSS. of O.T.,
Kthib, readings in margins of Hebrew                                                                                                                                                                                                     74; of N.T., 157.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Eushworth MS., 193.
    MSS., 33.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sahidic MSS., 163.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St. Petersburg MS. of the
Lachmann, C, edition of Greek N. T.                                                                                                                                                                                                      Prophets, 39.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Samaritan MSS., 47.
     by, 118.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sinaitic Syriac MS., 154.
 Lagarde, edition of Lucian's Septua-                                                                                                                                                                                                Stonyhurst Gospels, 172.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Theodulf's revised Vulgate,l 85.
     gint by, 68.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Verona Psalter, 65.
 Latin versions of 0. T., 77-83; of                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vienna Genesis, 63.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Zurich Psalter, 65.
     N.T., 165-173.
 Lindisfarne Gospels, the, 179-181

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;

     interlinear translation into English,
      193.
 Lollards, not persecuted on account
     of their English Bible, 206, 207.
                                                         ;

                                                         INDEX.                                                                                                 253

Mark, last twelve verses of Gospel of,                                                                                                                          Onkelos, Targum of, 30.
                                                                                                                                                                Origen, Hexapla of, 54-56.
    7, 127, 147, 164.                                                                                                                                           Ormulum, metrical translations from
Martin, Gregory, principal author of
                                                                                                                                                                    the Bible in, 196.
   Rheims and Douai Bible, 229.
Massorah, in Hebrew MSS., 32, 33, 35.                                                                                                                           Oxford, University of, supports Wy-
Massoretes, the, fixing of Hebrew text
                                                                                                                                                                    cliffe, 199, 200, 206.
    by, 32, 33.
Matthaei, C.F., edition of Greek N. T.,                                                                                                                         Palestinian Syriac version of N. T.-,
                                                                                                                                                                    159.
    by, 117.
Matthew's Bible, 220.                                                                                                                                           Palmer, Archdeacon, edition of the
Mazarin Bible, first printed book, 187-                                                                                                                            Eevisers' Greek text by, 239.
Memphitic version. See Bohairic ver-
                                                                                                                                                                Papyrus, use of, for writing, 19, 21,
     sion.                                                                                                                                                           94.

Mill, John, edition of Greek N. T.                                                                                                                              Pans, University of, promotes re-
    by, 116.                                                                                                                                                        vision of Vulgate, 186.

Moabite Stone, the, 24.                                                                                                                                         Parker, Archbishop, editor of Bishops'
More, Sir T., attacks Tyndale's N. T.,                                                                                                                              Bible, 226.

    213.                                                                                                                                                        Pentateuch, date of its adoption into

Nablous, copy of Samaritan Penta-                                                                                                                                  the Hebrew Canon of Scripture, 27.
    teuch at, 47.
                                                                                                                                                                Peshitto, Syriac version of Bible, 74,
Naples, text of Lindisfarne Gospels                                                                                                                                  157, 158.
    derived from, 179.
                                                                                                                                                                Philips, betrayer of Tyndale, 216.
Neutral text of N. T., 109, 111.                                                                                                                                Philoxenian Syriac version of N.T.,

New Testament, original MSS. of, 93,                                                                                                                                 158.
                                                                                                                                                                Printing, importance of invention of,
   94 ; conditions under which it was
    copied in early times, 95 ; the extant                                                                                                                          in history of Bible, 209.
   MSS., 96, 97, 101-103, 121-149;                                                                                                                              Prophets, the, date of their adoption
   printed editions, 98-100, 116-120
                                                                                                                                                                   into the Hebrew Canon of Scripture,
                                                                                                                                                             j
                                                                                                                                                                     28.
   ancient versions, 103, 104,151-173;                                                                                                                          Psalter, three Latin versions of,
   classification of MSS., 106-115.
                                                                                                                                                                   Eoman, Gallican, and Hebrew, 80.
Nitria, Syriac MSS. brought from,                                                                                                                                      , translated into English by Aid-

     74, 152.                                                                                                                                                      helm, 190; by Alfred, 192; by
Nycolson, printer of English Bible,2 1 9.                                                                                                                          anonymous translators, 192, 196 ;
                                                                                                                                                                   by William of Shoreham, 196 ; by
Old Latin version, of 0. T., 77-79; of                                                                                                                              Eichard Eolle, 197; Prayer-Book
                                                                                                                                                                    version, derived from Great Bible,
N. T.,  166-169 ;  MSS. of,  167,                        168
                                                                           ;                                                                                        223.
                                                                                                                                                                Purvey, John, probable author of
character of text, 107, 169.
                                                                                                                                                                     revised Wycliffite Bible, 201.
Old Testament, original MSS. of, 21
                                                                                                                                                                Eevised Version, the, its history, 237,
classification of books in, 26 ; for-                                                                                                                               238; its characteristics, 239-243;
                                                                                                                                                                    its reception, 243-245,
mation of Canon, 26-28 ; Hebrew

text, 23-48; Septuagint text, 48-

73 ;  other versions,  73-83                             general
                                                      ;

condition of the text, 83-92.
     ;                                                                              ;

254  INDEX.

Eheims N. T., 228, 229.                                                             Syriac language, 73 ; version of O.T.,
Rogers, John, produces Matthew's                                                        73-75; of N.T., 107, 152-159.

   Bible, 220 ; martyred, 224.                                                      Syrian text of N. T., 109; supposed
Eolle, Richard, of Hampole, translates                                                 due to revision at Antioch, 109,
                                                                                        114.
    Psalter, 197.
                                                                                    Talmud, its bearing on the Hebrew
Rushworth MS. of Gospels, Lat. and
                                                                                        text of the Bible, 31, 32.
    Eng., 193.                                                                      Targums, 29-31.
                                                                                    Taverner, R., his translation of the
Sahidic version of 0. T., 76 ; of N. T.,
     162, 163.                                                                          Bible, 223.
                                                                                    Tell el-Amarna, tablets found at, 17.
St. Gall, school of copyists at, 185.                                               Textual criticism, principles of, 4-10,
Samaritan characters, 23.
                                                                                         105, 106.
         Pentateuch, 44-48.                                                         Thebaic version. See Sahidic ver-
Sanday, Pi?of., Oxford Greek Testa-
                                                                                         sion.
   ment edited by, 120.
Scribes, mistakes of, 5-7.                                                          Theodoret, quotations from 0. T. by,
Scrivener, F. H. A., his contributions
                                                                                         70.
    to textual criticism of N. T., 119.
Septuagint, origin of, 49, 50 ; con-                                                Theodotion, Greek version of 0. T. by,

    tents, 50, 51 ; history, 51-57                                                       53.
   MSS. of, 59-67 printed editions,
                                                                                    Theodulf, Bishop of Orleans, revises
                                                                                 ;      Vulgate, 184.

   67, 68. Comparison with Hebrew                                                   Tischendorf, A. F. C, editions of
                                                                                        Septuagint by, 68 ; of Greek N. T.,
    text of O.T., 71, 85-92.                                                            118; discovers Codex Sinaiticus,
Shapira, forged copy of Deuteronomy                                                     122, 123 ; his efforts to collate
                                                                                        Codex Vaticaiius, 133, 134; pub-
    produced by, 43.                                                                    lishes Codex Ephraemi, 138.
Shoreham, William of* translates
                                                                                    Tomson, revises Geneva N. T., 226.
     Psalter, 196, 197.                                                             Tours, school of copyists established
Siloam, inscription in conduit of, 24.
                                                                                         at, 182, 183.
Simonides, C, claims to have written
    Codex Siuaiticus, 123.                                                          Tregelles, S. P., edition of Greek N. T.
                                                                                         by, 119.
Sinaitic MS. of Old Syriac, 154-157.
Sixtus, v.. Pope, promotes Roman                                                     Tunstall, Bishop, tries to destroy
                                                                                        Tyndale's N.T., 213; authorises
     edition of Septuagint, 67 ; authori-                                                Great Bible, 222.
     tative edition of Vulgate, 187.
 Skins, use of, for writing, 21.                                                    Tyndale, William, his life and trans-
Solomon, Psalms of, formerly in Codex                                                   lation of the Bible, 211-218.
    Alexandrinus, 60.
                                                                                    Variorum Bible described, 2, 120.
Spanish MSS. of Vulgate, 177, 184.                                                  Various readings, causes of, 5-8
 Stephanus, editions of Greek N. T.
                                                                                        examples of, in Gospels, 3.
     by, 99; of Vulgate, 187; introduces                                            Verse-division of Bible, when intro-
     verse-division, 225.
 Swete, Cambridge Septuagint edited                                                      duced, 225.
     by, 68.
 Symmachus, Greek version of O.T.
      by, 53.
INDEX.                                                                                                                          255

Versions, use of in textual criticism, 14.  Whitchurch, printer of Great Bible,

Vowel-points, errors caused by omis-        222, note.
   sion of, in Hebrew, 25, 88 ; Baby-
    lonian system of, 39.                   White, H. J., edition of Vulgate by,

Vulgate, origin of, 79-81 ; its recep-      171, 188.
    tion, 81, 82 ; its character in O.T.,
   82; in N. T., 169-173; MSS. of,          Whittingham, W., part-editor of
    170-172, 177-186; history of, in
    Middle Ages, 174-188; printed           Geneva Bible, 225.
    editions, 187, 188.
                                            Widmanstadt, edition of Peshitto by,
AValton, Bishop, Polygott Bible edited
    by, 116.                                157.

Westcott, Bishop, his edition (with         Wordsworth, Bjshop, edition of Vul-
   Hort) of Greek N. T., 107, 119.
                                            gate by, 171, 188.
Western text of N.T., 109, 110;
    examples, 142-144.                      Writing, antiquity of,                                           18                 in Baby-
                                                                                                                             ;
Wetstein, J. J., edition of Greek N. T.
    by, 117.                                lonia, ib.; in Egypt, 19 ; in Pales-

                                            tine, 20.

                                            Wycliffe, John, his hfe, 199, 200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;

                                            his Bible,  200-204                                              his                authorship
                                                                                                          ;

                                            questioned, 204-208.

                                            Ximenes, Cardinal, Complutensian
                                                Bible issued by, 41, 67, 98.
HER MAJESTY'S PRINTERS'

        Special i^ulilications*

THE STUDENT'S HANDBOOK TO THE PSALMS.

LEX MOSAICA; OR, THE OLD TESTAMENT AND THE HIGHER

                                         CRITICISM.

THE BIBLE AND THE MONUMENTS.

THE BIBLE STUDENT'S LIBRARY.

SPECIAL EDITIONS OF THE HOLY BIBLE.

SPECIAL EDITIONS OF THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER.

&c.                           &c.

            EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE,

LONDON -- GEEAT NEW STEEET, FLEET STEEET, E.G.

     EDINBURGH, GLASGOW, MELBOURNE, STDNEY, AND NEW YORK.

                            East Habding Stkeet, London, E.G.
                                                                                                                              1

                                                                              CONTENTS.

..... The Student's Handbook to the Psalms                                                                                 PAGE

                                                                                                                                 3

Ltsx Mosaica                                                         ok, The  Old  Testament  and  the  Higher  Criticism     4
                                                                  ;

Tub Bible and the Monuments; or, Primitive Hebrew Records

IN THE Light of Modern Research .                                                                       .  .    .  .       5, 6

-- The Queen's Printers' ^tMe §txtl>cnt'» $ibvavU'                                                                         7-11
.... Vol. I. The Foundations of the Bible                                                                       ·  -             8
                                                                                                                                 9
..... Vol. II. The Law in the Prophets

Vol. III. The Principles of Biblical Criticism                                                                  .  .       10

Vol. IV. Sanctuary and Sacrifice : a Reply to Wellhausen                                                                   1

The Queen's Printers' Special (Bhiiiotxtt of tlje ©<»Ih

The variorum Reference Bible (Large Type).                                                                      .  .       12

The variorum Reference Apocrypha (Large Type) .                                                                    . 13,14

The variorum Reference Teacher's Bible (Large Type),                                                                       15

The variorum Reference Teacher's Bible (Nonpareil 8vo.) 15

The Queen's Printers' Teacher's Bible (New Edition, 1894) , 17, 18

Aids to Bible Students (New Edition, 1894)                                                                 .    .  . 19,20

The Variorum and other Teacher's Bibles                                                                         .  .21-23
... The Marked Lectern Bible (in red and black)                                                            .

..... The Family Bible with Commentary                                                                                     24

                                                                                                                           25

The Queen's Printers' §t»erirtl (Bhitiona of Hje ^ook of

...... The Annexed Book of 1662 in Type (wiih Appendices) .                                                        .       26
                                                                                                                           26
The Historical Prayer Book

Barry's Teacher's Prayer Book {with Glossary) .                                                                 .  .       27

 Select Glossary of Bible Words, also a Glossary of Important                                                              28
                                                                                                                           28
  .... Words and Phrases in the Prayer Book
.... The Psalter with Commentary (Large Type)
         Special "^'ublicttfions.

STUDENT'S HANDBOOK TO THE PSALMS.

                                   Late Fellow of Christ College, Cambridge.

      Size, small 4to., cloth, bevelled boards, gilt top, price 12/-

rpHIS Handbook aims at treating the poetry and theology of the Psalms

        in such a manner as shall benefit not only the student of the Hebrew,
but also the English reader who takes an intelligent interest in the con-
troversies of the day, and finds in the Psalms the daily food of devotion.

     The work will be of use to students for theological degrees, and to all
who adopt the purpose of St. Paul : " / will dng with the spirit and I will

-- sing with the understatiding also." 1 Co7: 14. 15.

                SOME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
  -- The Times. " Very useful to students and devout readers."

   The Church Times.--" We thoroughly commend it to our readers."

    Literary "World.--" Dr. Sharpe has taken infinite pains to place his subject
as clearly as possible before the English reader."

  -- Record. " Dr. Sharpe is to be warmly thanked for his book. It is good to find

a scholar referring to the 'old paths' and. confessing that 'continued study ever
demonstrates more fully' their superiority."

    The Christian "World.--"It is full of useful information."

  -- Sunday School Chronicle. "The book is one -which Sunday School Teachers

will find exceptionally useful."

    The Irish Times.--" This handbook to the Psalms will be invaluable to every
enrnpst Christian student. Dr. Sharpe lays the Christian communities under an

obligation everywhere."

    The Scotsman.--" The book will be highly prized by those who 'stand in the
old paths' and which those who are seeking to advance will find worthy of their

considerations."

   "Western Morning News.--" A scholarly and valuable book, which should be

found in all theological libraries."

                  RETAIL OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

S 2764.  EYEE ^ SFOTTISWOODE.

                                                      U2
                                                 :

                  Special ^ubltcafions.

     LEX MOSAICA;

Of, THE LAW OF MOSES AND THE HIGHER CRITICISM.

                                               EDITED BY THE

 ReY. RICHARD YALPY FRENCH, D.C.L., LL.D., F.S.A.,

                              WITH AN INTKODUCTION BY THE LATE

RIGHT REVEREND LORD ARTHUR C. HERVEY, D.D.,

                                         Bishop of Bath and Wells.

fab CssHns bg ^'^·'inoHS ©Irttcrs an i\)t  of |Eloscs anb t^t iis^er (Kritirism.

                  LIST OS" C03SrTIi,I'BXJT0I?/S

Rev. A. H. Satce, D.D., LL.D.      Rev, J. Shaepe, D.D.
Rev. Geoege Rawmnson, M.A.         Rev, Alexandee Stewaet, LL.D.,
Rev. Geoege C. M. Douglas, D.D.
Rev. R. B. Giedlestone, M.A.                 F.A.S.
Rev. Richard Valpt Feench, D.C.L.
                                   Rev, Stanley Leathes, D.D.
Rev. J. J. Lias, M.A.              Rev. Robert Sinker. D.D.
                                   Rev. F. E. Spencee, M.A.
Rev, F. Watson, D.D,               Rev. RoBEET Watts, D.D., LL.D.

                  WITH A SUMMARY BY THE

HENET Eev.        "WAGE, D.D., Principal of King's College, London.

Royal 8vo., Half-bound Vellum Cloth, Red Burnished Edges, 15/-

                  SOME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

   The Times,--"' Lex Mosaica' is a sustained and reasoned criticism of the Higher
Criticism conducted by a variety of competent hands."

   Church Times.--" Here stands the deliverance of fourteen able men speaking at

their best."

We Record,--"     fully believe that this book will be of great use in this time of unrest."
-- Churchman. " This important vrork is a thoroush exposition of the crude and

arbitrary guesses of the theoretical school of criticism, and contains a powerful

-- defence of the traditional view."

   Tablet, "We have in this volume an important contribution to the literature

of the subject."

    Expository Times,--"'Lex Mosaica' is the most serious effort that has yet been
made to stem the advancing tide of Old Testament criticism."

    Church Family Newspaper,--" The volume is one of great interest, which must
command the earnest attention both of Biblical Students and critics."

   Sunday School Chronicle.--" We very gladly welcome this book. It presents a

mass of clear and precise information of priceless value to the Bible students."

    The Methodist Times,--"The writers of 'Lex Mosaica' deserve the grateful
thanks of all who believe in the Old Testament as a revelation of God, given through

men who were guided in all their work by the operation of the Divine Spirit."

Oxford Journal.--"No student of the Old Testament time should omit to read

these Essays."

    Cambridge Chronicle.--"' Lex Mosaica' is one of the most elaborate expositions

-- of the historical part of the Bible that has ever been produced."
    Irish Times. "The volume of the year."

                  RETAIL OP ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                  EYBE ^ SPOTTISWOODE,
                                Special '^ubltcaHons.

THE BIBLE AND THE MONUMENTS.

f %li]t rimitifie Stbxdvi §.ttoxh in tl/^

      Sijgljt of ^ohxn §.mnxtl].

                                                       BY

  W. St. chad BOSCAWEN,

Fellow of the Boyal Historical Society, Member of the Society of Biblical

                                                   Archmology.

        "WITH 21 PHOTOGRAPHIC ILLUSTRATIONS.

IDemy 8vo., Boiind Clotlx Boards. Brice ^s.

EXTRACT FROM THE PREFACE.

THE East has ever been the land of surprises, and year after year the
         explorer and the decipherer are bringing to light treasures which lor
centuries have been buried beneath the dust of ages. The discoveries in
Egj'pt, Assyria, and Babylonia have restored to us the inscribed records and
monuments of great civilisations which preceded or existed concurrently with
the Hebrew people and held contemporary intercourse with them. The History
of the Hebrew people as recorded in the Old Testament has been found to be
a part, and an important part, of the wider study of Oriental history.

     The discovery of Babylonian versions of the Creation, the Fall, and the
Deluge, and the story of the beginnings of civilisation, instituted a series of
comparisons between monumental records, of admitted antiquity, and the
Hebrew writings, a process the importance of which was beyond question.

In this work I have placed before my readers the Babylonian and Assyrian

versions of those traditions which are found in the early chapters of Genesis,

and such comparisons are instituted as seemed to me to be within the range

of fair criticism, and I have endeavoured to conduct this inquiry in as un-

My biassed a manner as possible.  object has been to place before my readers

those monuments and inscriptions which seem to bear upon the early traditions
of the Hebrew people, in order that they may have before them documentary

evidence which has hitherto only been accessible to specialists.

GREAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.C.
Special ^ublicafions.

THE BIBLE AND THE MONUMENTS-^^«^'««^</.

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS,

All of which, with the exception of those marked {*) have been repro-

duced from Photographs taken by Messrs. EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE

                                       from the originals.

MANEH WEIGHT.                        ASSYRIAN TABLET OF THE FALL.
MACE HEAD OF SARGON I. (B.C.         MERODACH AND THE DRAGON.
                                     SEAL OF TEMPTATION.
       3800).
                                    ' RUINS OF TELLO.
TABLET OF ASSDR-NAZIR-PAL I.
                                    ' HARPER AND CHOIR (B.C. 3000).
       (B.C. 1800).                  BRONZE FIGURES (B.C. 2800) AND

INDIA HOUSE INSCRIPTION OF              FIRE-GOD (B.C. 722).
    NEBUCHADNEZZAR II. (B.C. 606).
                                    · STATUE OF GUDEA (B.C. 2800).
FIRST CREATION TABLET (COPIED
    ABOUT 660).                      DELUGE TABLET (PORTION OF
                                       THE ELEVENTH TABLET).
BOUNDARY STONE OF NEBUCHAD-
    NEZZAR L (B.C. 1120).            DELUGE TABLET, No. 2.

TABLET FROM THE TEMPLE OF            SEAL REPRESENTING THE CHAL-
    THE SUN-GOD AT SIPPARA (B.C.        DEAN NOAH.

       900).                         WINGED HUMAN-HEADED LION.
                                     JACKAL-HEADED GOD.
TEL EL-AMARNA TABLET (B.C. 1450).
EAGLE-HEADED FIGURE.

                     Some ©pfnlons oX tbc ipress.

    The Times.--"An able attempt to bring the Primitive Hebrew Records into rela-
tion with the Babylonian and Assyrian versions of the same traditions. It is well

illustrated."

   Daily Chronicle.--"A useful contribution to the literature of the subject."
    Churchman.--" Mr. Boseawen has rendered important service in the sphere of

Biblical criticism in the publication of his important volume on the Primitive Hebrew
Records in the Light of Modern Research."

    Ohserver.--" Mr. W. St. Chad Boseawen, the well-known Assyriologist, has earned
the thanks of all scholars by the production of this work, in which the latest results of
Assyriology and Scriptural criticism are given. The learned author has spared no
pains to make this usually difficult subject one of the greatest interest to his readers.
The book is beautifully illustrated."

    Bookseller.--"Mr. Boscawen's style is concise and easy, and the photographic
illustrations add much to the understanding of the subject."

    Publisher's Circular.--'" The Bible and the Monuments' will be read by students
with avidity and interest from the first page to the last, and the general reader will
find it of absorbing interest."

   The Christian.--" A work of great usefulness."
   "Western Morning News.--"The book will really supply a need. Mr. Boscawen's

industr.v and thorough acquaintance with the subject are ver.v conspicuous."

                  EYEE 8r SPOTTISWOODE,
                                  Special 'publications.

 THE BIBLE STDDENT'S LIBRARY.

     Cloth. Boards, Hed Edges. IDemy 8vo.

                Volumes l.-IV. Others in preparation.

THIS Series of A^olumes, popular in style and moderate in

         size and price, is designed to meet the needs of the ordinary
Bible Student, a large and increasing class of practical students
of the Bible, as well as the requirements of more advanced scholars.

   Much light has been thrown in the course of the present century

on almost all branches of Biblical Inquiry, and it is very desirable
that such results as are surely ascertained should be placed within
the reach of all in a systematic manner. Difficulties will always
remain, owing to the extreme antiquity of the Sacred Books, and

to the peculiar nature of their contents. On these questions

experts must be heard upon both sides, but the multitude which
is so deeply interested in the results has neither the time nor the
training for battling over technical details.

    Accordingly, the preparation of these volumes is entrusted to

men who have patiently considered the drift of modern inquiry so
far as it concerns their own special branches of study, and who are
not lightly moved from their carefully formed convictions.

    Their aim is to set forth as clearly and accurately as possible
the literary position of the Books of the Old and Ifew Testa-
ments and their contents in relation to Theological, Historical, and

Scientific questions.

   The series is mainly constructive and positive in tone, and will

tend to check that bewilderment as to the very foundations of
sacred truth which, if alloAved to spread, will seriously affect the

work of the Sunday School Teacher, the Bible Class Leader, the

Home and Foreign JVJ issionary, and the devotional student of

Scripture.

         GEEAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.G.
                          Special "^ublicafions.

THE BIBLE STUDENT'S LIBRARY.

                  FOURTH EDITION, REVISED.

                                VolTime I.

THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE BIBLE:

      STUDIES IN OLD TESTAMENT CRITICISM.

                                                  BY

 R. B. GIRDLESTONE, M.A.,

Son. Canon of Christ Church ; late Principal of Wycliffe Hall, Oxford.

Cloth Boards, Red Edges. Demy 8vo. Price 3s. 6ci.

                  SOIVEE OI'INIONS.

    Guardian.--" Written in a reverent spirit."

  -- Theological Monthly. "Any one who takes up the book will be led, we think,

to peruse and ponder tiJl he arrives at a sound conclusion on what is, and must
remain, one of the most importan,t matters within human ken."

   Church Review.--" An invaluable work."

  -- Rock. " Canon Girdlestone as an expert gives us the results of his own personal

research. We are taken into the very workshop and shown the methods and processes

by which the final results have been attained."

Churchman.--" It is worthy to become » text-book in a theological assembly."

Christian.--" Will assist many to gain a firm foothold with regard to the verity of

Holy Writ."
-- Literary Churchman. " This is a book of exceeding breadth of learning, and
We quite exceptional value.
                             desire to give an unusually emphatic recommendation to

this valuable treatise."

Literary Opinion.--" The style throughout is clear, elevated, and forcible."

Glohe.--" A mine of strength to the holders of the ancient faith."
-- We Quiver. *'
                  can heartily commend it."
-- Baptist. " Canon Girdlestone's arguments will command general respect."

    National Church.--" This is precisely the kind of work wanted in these critical

times."

  -- Evening News. " A perfect armoury of argument and scholarship."
  -- Yorkshire Post. " Shows results as interesting as they are valuable."
  -- Church Bells. " The various topics involved are put in a very interesting way."

    British Weekly.--" It has a calm and dignified style--beauty itself, with a splendid
courtesy to opponents, and altogether it is a pleasant book to read."

                  RETAIL OP ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                          EYBE ^ SPOTTISWOOJDE,
Special ^ttbticaftons.

THE BIBLE STUDENT'S L\BR^RY--conhflued.

"Volume II,

   THE LAW IN THE PROPHETS.

                                                    BY THE

Rev. STANLEY LEATHES, 1>,D.,

       Professor of Hebrew, King's College, London ; Prebendary of St. Paul's ;
                         Author of " The Structure of the Old Testament " ;

' The Religiou of tie Christ " {Bampton Lecture) ; " Christ and the Bible," &c., &c.

     Cloth Boards, Red Ed^es. Demy 8vo. Price 3s. 6d.

                EXTRACT FROM THE PREFACE.

    The late Dr. Liddon wrote : " Ho^w I wish you could see your
" way to writing a book on, say, ' The Law and the Prophets,'
" putting the Law back into the chronological and authoritative
" place from which the new criticism would depose it, and so
" incidentally reasserting in the main, and with the necessary

" reservations, the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch."

     This book is partly the result of that suggestion.

SOIVIE OPINIONS.

Church Quarterly Eeview.--" A careful -work."

    Guardian.-" Deserves wide jciroulation  It was an excellent idea thus to collect

-- these allusions."
    Church Times. " Most valuable."

    Spectator.--" Proves the antiquity of the Mosaic Law, by the references that are
made to it in the books of the Prophets, books that are conceded on all hands to have
at least a considerable relative antiquity. The contention of the extremists, that the

whole legal ritual is post-exilian, certainly lays itself open to hostile criticism. The
appeal of the Prophets to the Hebrew people seems founded on the fact that there
was a covenant which the people had broken."

    Chtirch Review.--" If Dr. Stanley Leathes had never done any other good thing

than he has clone in writing this most valuable book, he would be fairly entitled to

-- rank as one of the most successful defenders of Holy Scriptures of our day."

    Baptist Magazine. " Dr. Leathes has set an example which all who are opposed
to the method and result of modern Biblical criticism would do well to follow. He
brings the question to a sound and religious test."

RETAIL OP ALIi BOOKSELLERS.

GBEAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.G.
10  Special "^ublicaftons.

    THE BIBLE STUDENT'S UBR/KRY-con/mued.

    Volixme III.

PRINCIPLES OF BIBLICAL CRITICISM.

             Rev. J. J. LIAS, M.A.,

Chancellor of Llandaff Cathedral ; formerly Hulsean Lecturer, and Preacher
                                       at the Chapel Royal, Wldtehall.

    Cloth Boards, Red Edges. Demy 8vo. Price 3s. 6d.

IllE. LIAS, -who is well known as a writer on theology and literature, in this
·^'-*- book offers a historical view of the two chief lines of criticism, which
have been directed against the Old and New Testaments, and points out that
the wave of adverse criticism, after failing when levelled against the Christian
Scriptures, the New Testament, has now for its object the disintegration of the
Hebrew Records of the Old Testament. He brings to the task an easy style of
an unfettered mind ; takes his own line in discussing such subjects as Inspira-
tion, and tests the results of modern critical analysis in the light of good sense,
whilst passing under review the historical and prophetical writings of the Old

Testament.

   On the whole, for a beginner in critical studies there are few books which

are so likely to put the student on the right line as " Principles of Biblical
Criticism."

    SOME THE OPINIONS OF                      PRESS.
    -- The Church Times. " "We have seldom seen in so small a compass so admirable,
and withal temperate, exposition of the ingenious puzzles which German criticism has
We been weaving under the guise of truth.
                                              gratefully recognize the value and

importance of this volume ; and a reverent investigation carried on, on the lines here

-- suggested, cannot fail to be profitable to the Biblical student."

   The Becord. "The book is one that we can very cordially recommend ; it is both

leverent and scholarly, the discussions are temperate and logical, and the style

attractive. It s likely to do good service."

    -- Church Quarterly Review.-- "Mr. Lias is entitled to the gratitude of churchmen."

    The Churchman, "'Principles of Biblical Criticism' will prove of real and

lasting service. AVe hope it will be very widely circulated, as it deserves to be."

  -- -- Expository Times. " Exceedingly useful as a storehouse of facts."

    Spectator. " Perhaps the most important chapter is that of ' The Evidence of

the Psalms.' Mr. Lias knows that the controversy turns largely on the date of these."

    RETAIL OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

    EYEE 8f SPOTTISWOOEE,
      Special ^ublicalions.                              ii

THE BIBLE STUDENT'S L\BR^RY--con/mued.

      Voliinae IV.

SANCTUARY AND SACRIFICE:

Rev.  A REPLY TO WELLHAU8EN.                    !>,!>,,

                                   BY THE

      W. L. BAXTER, M.A.,

                          Minister of Cameron.

Cloth. Boards, Red Edges. Demy 8vo. Price Ss.

THOUGH specially designed for Bible Students, this volume demands no

      attainments in Hebrew scholarship for its appreciation. Its main aim is to
guide and strengthen an ordinary reader, with his English Eible in his hand.

     In particular, the dismemberment of the Mosaic legislation into three
antagonistic Codes is shown (taking Sanctuary and Sacrifice as conclusive
tests) to be quite at variance with a fair and comprehensive survey of the
legal, historical, and prophetical Kecords of the Old Testament.

     \Miile exposing the views of Wellhausen (the applauded pioneer of " Higher
Critics"), the author seeks at every turn to give a positive presentation of
Bible truth on the topics handled. Mere destruction is not his aim, but to

instruct and to re-assure. He inclines to hope that many may feel a special
helpfulness in his constructive surveys of the prophecy of Ezekiel, and of the

(so-called) Priestly Code.

                       Some ©pinions:

  -- Mr. Gladstone. ^'Unless your searching inquiry can be answered, and your state-

ments confuted, Wellhausen's character, literary and theological, is destroyed, at least
for all those who have profited by your investigation."

    Bishop EUicott.--" Your counter-argument is very strone and clear. In fact, as I
read the first paper, I wondered what answer your opponent could possibly make."

    Professor Sayce.--" It is the first tin.e that the Prolegomena has been thoroughly,
critically, and dispassionately examined, and I confess that the result surprises me."

    Professor Watts.--"You have exposed the utter recklessness of Wellhausen's

assaults on the Inspired Record."
    Professor Robertson, Glasgow.--" I have read your articles with great delight. I

have been looking for some one to take up that patient line of inductive proof, and you

-- have the necessary qualifications for the task."

    Professor Story. " You have taken Wellhausen thoroughly to pieces, and exposed

-- his pretentiousness in a way which would confound any one but a ' Higher Critic' "

    Very Eev. A. K. K. Boyd. " I have enjoyed the bright and incisive way in which
you have gone for Wellhausen. As far as I can judge, you have made mincemeat of him."

                  RETAIL OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

         GREAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.C.
                                                                                     :        :

12                                              Special ^ublicafioits.

    THE NEW BIBLE FOR PREACHERS, TEACHERS, & STUDENTS.

Large Type VARIORUM Reference Me,

                                         (Size, 9;; X 6J X ]i inches. 130S pages.)

                                      ((Sj^e, 91 X 6J X 11 inches. 276 pirffeST")

    For the TEACHER'S EDITION {1980 pages) see page 15.

    The Year 1893 will be remembered by Bible Readers for the Publication of New

Editions of the various Teacher's Bibles, but most jiarticularly for the

       Completion of the New Edition of the Variorum Reference Bible.

      The VARIORUIVI Edition of the Authorised Version has a preat and independent
value, whether for daily use or as a standard work of Refen^nce. It meets the wants of
every grade of student, from the intelligent reader to the learned reviser.

     In its style and appearance the VARIORUIVI Reference Bible, has been stu-
diously assimilated to the ordinary 8vo, Reference Bible to make its utility no less

universal.

      This Edition is distinguished from all other Reference Bibles by the addition,
on the same page as the Text, in Foot-notes, of a complete digest of the chief of the

various Renderings and Readings of the original text from the very best Authorities.
The sources from which the Annotations are taken comprise, in the

OLD TESTAMENT.                                   APOCRYPHA.                 NEW TESTAMENT.

    90 Commentators,                            4.9q Commeennttaalloorras,        ^^ Commentators,

V ,.                            ·  inc1ludring       20 Versions,           6 Ancient Versions,
                                                                                              .M,anuscript\s,
14  Versions,                                                               ,,,,  .     ·  ^
                                                                            23
t^1h- e  TR,evi·sedJ               TT  ·                                          Ancient

                                   Version,                                 H Critical Editions of the Text.

R.V. Marginal Readings.                         15 Manuscripts.             Revised Version & Margin.

     The VARIORUM Notes, together with the "New 9il)B to JSifale StutcnlB " {see

pages 15-17), give to the ordinary reader of Scripture an amount of information
hitherto confined to great scholars and owners of a very costly Library, and com-
prise the quintessence of Biblical Scholarship in the most convenient form.

     The Commentary here is strictly textual (with Brief Explanatory Notes) ; and

the names of the Editors--Professors CHEYNB, DRIVER, SANDAY, the late Isev.

-- P. L. CLARKE, and the Rev. C. J. BALL are sufficient guarantees for its accuracy

and completeness.

          -- The numerous Commendations of the completed Work include
     -- The Rev. Dr. Wace, Principal of King's College, London

  " It is a work of incalculable usefulness, for which the wannest gratitude is due alike
to the editors and yourselves."

       The Rev. Canon "W. J. Knox Little :--
   " It is a beautiful and valuable work. I think it the most satisfactory copy I have
ever had. I like it more, the more I make use of it."

                                       RETAIL OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                                             EYRE ^ SFOTTISWOOBE,
                                                                              .,

                     Special "^ublicaftons.                                       13

THE VARIORUM APOCRYPHA:

EDITED WITH VARIOUS RENDERINGS AND READINGS FROM
                      THE BEST AUTHORITIES,

Rev.                                BY THE                   M.A.,

                     C. J. BALL,

                       Chaplain of Lincoln's Inn.

Large Type. (Boiirgeoia 8vo.) Superfine Paper. 276 Pages.

Cloth, bevelled boards, red edges                                                   6/6
                                                                                    7/6
Leather, gilt edges                                                                8/6
                                                                                  13/6
Leather, round corners, red under gold edges, gold roll inside cover . .  ,        16/-
                                                                                   24/-
Morocco, boards or limp, gilt edges, gold roll inside cover

Morocco, limp, round corners, red under gold edges, gold roll inside cover .

Levant Yapp, round corners, gilt edges, lined Calf panels

                 so:m:e: opinions.

        Guardian :--

      Mr. Ball has worked through a large number of authorities--forty-nine ; he has
not however confined himself to quoting their opinions, but has added throughout
many suggestions of his own, both critical and explanatory.

    "The information which he has given is judiciously selected, and the advance
marked by his work, on previous works upon the Apocrypha, is exceedingly great."

        Record :--

    " The study of the Apocrypha is gaining ground, and it is a great convenience to
have the interpretations of the commentators in so handy a form. Lovers of
ancient Jewish literature must heartily thank the editor for placing in their
hands so convenient and trustworthy a summary of recent criticism."

        Globe :--                                                He contributes
    "The editor has done his work carefully and with knowledge.
an informing preface, and his annotations are to the point."

       Church Review:--

    "This volume, which completes the 'Variorum Bible' is a fitting crown to a
task which has done more to explain the littera scripta of the Holy Scriptures
than any other publication of its kind,

    "Mr. Ball's scholarship and researches have brought much light to bear on many

obscure passages.

    " The number of commentators, Tersions, and MSS. consulted by the editor is a
guarantee of the thoroughness with which he has discharged his task; his name
guarantees the ability with which he has done it."

GREAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.G.
u                   Special "^libUcalions.

       VARIORUM APOCRYPHJK--con/mued.

        Expository Times :--

    "Possessors of the 'Variorum Bible' will understand what the Tariornm
Apocrypha means. There was great need for such an edition of the Apocrypha.
The work has been done with patience and good judgment."

        Public Opinion:--

   "Furnishes the general reader with the quintessence of modem and ancient

learning bearing on the text."

       Literary World:--

    "Mr. Ball gives us a 'Variorum' edition, embodying not only different readings,
but in some cases his own happy emendation of corrupt passages. He gives the
poetical parts in metrical form. His edition will be prized by the student, and will
stimulate the appetite of the English reader."

        Ecclesiastical Chronicle :--

    " To have all the best renderings focussed, as it were, for ready use, is a privilege
every student of the book should appreciate."

        Rock :--
    " It is most convenient for the requirements of the student. It should find a

place in every clergyman's library."

       Church Quarterly Review;--

   "One of the greatest difficulties in dealing with the Apocrypha consists in the

endeavours to restore the lost original text of books which, for the most part, once
existed in the Hebrew tongue. In his preface Mr. Ball points out numerous
instances where confusions of similar Hebrew letters have made sheer nonsense of
the Greek text.

    " The book is a welcome addition to the well-known Variorum Reference Bible."

       Saturday Review:--
   "The books of the Apocrypha, containing as they do much splendid literature,
should have the long standing neglect they have suffered removed, by such an

edition."

    Queen :--

"A valuable work."

   Church Times:--

"Most complete, containing everything having an important bearing on the text."

   Professor £. B'ESTLE, the distinguished Septuagint Scholar, writes: --

    "Eine Erganzung zur Varior-um Bible, die nicht genug empfohlen werden kann."

-- Theologische Literaturzeitnng, Leipzig, 20 Januar, 1894.

How "  splendidly has Ball restored the corrupt text of Judith xvi. 2 (3) fiy

inserting a single letter, 6 TiSels. Many more examples might be quoted from Ball's

-- Variorum Apocrypha." From Professor E. Nestle's Paper on The Cambridge

Septuagint (Transactions of The Ninth International Congress of Orientalists).

       EYBE ^ SPOTTISWOODE,
                   Special ^ublicaftons.                                                 15

THE BIBLE READER'S VADE MECUM.

THE VARIORUM TEACHER'S BIBLE.

AFOCRYPHA. \^rith.                                         (276 pages.) See pp. 12, 13.

NEW LARGE TYPE EDITION.

                       Bourgeois 8vo. (Size, 9| x 6| x 2| inches). 1980 pages.

This novel and comprehensive Edition of the Aiithorised Version--the climax

-- towards which the Queen's Printers have consistently developed their Series of

Teacher's Bibles during nearly 20 years (1875-1894) combines--

   I.--The VARIORUM llcfcvettcc #iblc. (See pp. 12, 13.)

  II.--The " Al DS io iJje ^txttrent tff tije golli ^ible." (See pp. 17, 18.)

   To the completed Variorum Edition of the Reference Eible, the appended
"Aids to the Bible Student" adds a compendium of Biblical information
admitted to be not only the largest and fullest work of the kind, but also the
best. The most competent judges have drawn attention to the compass and

-- -- thoroughness of the " Aids '* none of which are anonymous, and to the

eminence and authority of the contributors.

Special Subjects.                                Authors.          Special Subjects,

HISTORY OF BIBLE.                                SWETE.            PLANTS.
                                                         LUMBY.*
                                          BALL.

 MUSIC.            BOSCAWEN. MADDEN.                                   METALS, &c.
POETBT.                                                           ANIMAL CREATION.
                   CHEYNE.* MASKELYNE.
MONEY.                                                              PROPER NAMES.
                   DRIVER.*                      MAYHEW.

                   GIRDLESTONE. SANDAY.

                   GREEN.                        SAYCE.*

ETHNOLOGY.         HOLE.                         STAINER.          CHRONOLOGY.
                   HOOKER.                       TRISTRAM.

BIBLE& MONUMENTS. LEATHES.*                      WRIGHT. HISTORICAL EPITOME.

                   ' Members of Old Testament Revision Committee.

Pbices, rinpst India Papor. from 27s. to 52s. 9d. ; with Apocrypha, 63. 9d. additional.
             Thin White Paper , in various leather bindings, from 24s. to 47s. 3d.
                     SCHOLASTIC EDITION, bound in cloth, 18s. 9d.;
                                  with Apocrtpha, 4s. 6d. additional.

                 SCHOOL EDITION.

                                     Without Apocrypha.

          Nonpareil 8vo. (Size, 7f x 5^ x 1| inches.) 1250 pages.
Prices (Finest India Paper or Thin White Paper), from 7s. 6d. to 38s. 6d.

GEEAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.G.
16  Special "^ublicafiotts

                      THE

ADVANTAGES of the VARIORUM

                           Above every other Bible.
         For the Variorum TEACHER'S Bible, see page 15.

1. It contains a collection of foot-notes, vastly superior to any that can be found
          in any one-volume portable Bible.

2. THE GENERAL READER unacquainted with the original languages, Hebrew

          and Greek, is enabled to arrive at a truer, fuller, and deeper meaning of
          Scripture than he could obtain from any other published work. The

         VARIORUM foot-notes correct, explain, unfold, and paraphrase the text; in-

          deed, the alternative versions of obscure or difficult words and phrases often
          render further note or comment needless.

3. THE SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHER will find the use of the VARIORUM foot-

          notes of the utmost value to him in the preparation of his lessons. And,
          whilst teaching, a glance at the foot of the page will enable him to give the

            best alternative reading or translation of the original text, or to explain
           phrases or special words in the A.V.

           Rev. Dr. PARKER says that if is quite as valuable for preachers and

          hearers as for teachers and scholars. It is a library in itself, containing
           everything that is immediately needed for the elucidation of the sacred text.

4. THE MODERN PREACHER finds every passage ear-marked of which the text

           or the translation is considered by scholars defective, and in the corresponding
           foot-notes he finds the evidence, for and against alterations, judicially digested
           from the most authoritative Versions and Editions, including the readings and
           renderings adopted in the Revised Version and its margin. This discrimination
          of sources and of authorities saves him infinite time and labour. Where all
           scholars agree upon a rendering the names of authorities are omitted.

           The archbishop OF CANTERBURY says: "It is so useful that no

          apology is, I am sure, needed for commend'ing it."

5. THE PROFESSIONAL STUDENT of the original texts will find in this con-

           spectus a more careful selection of critical data, especially as regards the

         Old Testament and authorities, than is elsewhere accessible. He will have
           at hand the very essence of textual criticism, extracted from the most reliable

           sources, ancient and modern.

            Dr. WESTCOTT (LorTd Bishop of DtjeHaM) says: "I constantly use the

           Old Testament, and find it a great help to have at hand a brief and trust-
           iix)rthy summary of facts and results. Nothing could be better done than
          the Psalms." He also informed the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
          Conference at Lambeth that he considered that this VARIORUM Edition of
           the Authorised Version " ivas much the best edition of the kind,"

                   RETAIL OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                   EYBE Sf SPOTTISWOODE,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Special "j^ubricafioits.                            17

              NEW EDITION (1894), WITH REVISED

     AIDS TO BIBLE STUDENTS.

           EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE'S

TEACHER'S BIBLES
            (With. AT^OCRYPHA).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              For details see pages 12 to 20.

     FIFTEEN EDITIONS. Prices from 3s. to £.2 2s.

-- In- this series of Editions of the Authorised Version several of them page

         for page--are combined--

-- I. The Queen's Printers' l^lefercnce & IJartorutn Reference ^tblco.

II.--The Queen's Printers' "AIDS to ilje §tttl*»nt of tlje golu ^tble."

     The "Aids to the Bible Stiulent " is a compendium of Bibhcal information
admitted to be not only the largest and fullest work of the kind, but also the

-- -- best. The most competent judges have drawn attention to the compass and

thoroughness of the "Aids" none of which are anonymous, and to the
eminence and authority of the contributors.

Special Subjects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Authors.              Special Subjects.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I

HISTORY OF BIBLE.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SWETE.            PLANTS.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BOSCAWEN. LUMBY.*
            MUSIC.
         POETRY.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CHEYNE.*   MADDEN.               METALS, dc.

         MONEY.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GIRDLESTONE. MASKELYNE. ANI3IAL CREATION.
     ETHNOLOGY.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GREEN.     SANDAY.
BIBLE& MONUMENTS.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HOLE.      SAYCE.*               PROPER NA3IES.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HOOKER.    STAINER               CHRONOLOGY.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LEATHES.*  WRIGHT.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TRISTRAM.                HISTORICAL EPITOME,

                                                      * Members of Old Test.iment ReTision Cominittee.

   The AIDS, now approaching their 20tli year of publication, have once again been
thoroughly revised to date and enlarged.

    The work of the Westminster Revisers has been dulv collated, and their iden-

tifications of words relating to the "ANIMAL CREATION IN THE BIBLE,"
and "PLANTS OF THE HOLY LAND," have been criticised by the Rev. Dr.
TRrsTRAM, F.R.S. "THE SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS OF THE BOOKS OF
THE OLD TE.STAMENT" has been revised and extended by the Rev. Canon

R. B. GiRDLKSTOXE. and "THE REFERENCES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT TO

PASSAGES IN THE OLD" by the Rev. Dr. H. B. Swete.

            -- Amongst other Additions are the following Articles:

THE  BIBLE                                       ITS  HISTORY.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        By Rev. Dr. H. B. Swete, Regius Professor of
                                              :

Divinity, Cambridge.

HEBREW POETRY. By Rev. Canon R. B. Girdlestone, M.A.

THE TESTIMONY OF THE MONUMENTS TO OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   By W. St. Chad Boscawen, Esq.

                                                 GREAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.G.

S 2764.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        X
              18                            Special '^ithlications.

EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE'S TEACHER'S BIBLES-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 continiied.

                                          SPECIMENS OF TYPES.

                   PEARL 24ino.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *0t, right-           MINION 8vo.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 eousness.
                   TAKE heed thart ye do not yotfr                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Deut. 24.     TAKE heed that ye do not your
                             II alms before men, to be sefen of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 alms before men, to be seen of
                      them : otherwise ye hiive no reward                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13.           them : otherwise ye have no reward 3 of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ps. 112. 9.   your Father which is in heaven.
                         of your Father which is in heaven.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dan. 4. 27.    2 Therefore " when thou doest thine
                                                 II                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2 Cor. 9. 9,  alms, do ·* not sound a trumpet before
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               thee, as the hypocrites do in the syna-
                        2 Therefore " when thou doest                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10.           gogues and in the streets, that they
                       thine alms, I do not sound a trum-
                        pet before thee, as the hypocrites                                                                                                                                                                                                                       « Or, Kith.
                      do in the synagogues and in the
                      streets, that they may have glory                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a Rom. 12.
                       of men. Verily I sny unto yCAi,
                       They have theii" reward.

              (Size, 55 x 4i x if inches.)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (SIZE, 7j X 5I X ij inches.}

P». 112. 9.            RUBY 8vo.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A.KNO            BREVIER 8vo.
Din. 4. 27.
2 Cor. 9. 9,      TAKE heed that ye do not your                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DOMINI        Father which seeth in secret shall
                         alms before men, to be seen of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        reward thee openly.
                                               II                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        31.
                  them : otherwise ye have no reward                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7 But when ye pray, "^use not vain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *Ecclea.5.2.
                   of your Father which is In heaven.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e 1 Kins8i».  repetitions, as the heathen do: *for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 26,29.
                  II                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           they think that they shall be heard

                   2 Therefore " when thou doest                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               for their much speaking.
                  thine alms, l| do not sound a trum-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8 Be not ye therefore like unto

                  pet before thee, as the hypocrites                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           them : for your Father knoweth
                  do in the synagogues and in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (Size, 8 J X 6 x 2 inches.)
                  streets, that they may have glory
                  of men. Verily I say unto you.
                  They have their reward.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I

              (Size, 6| x sf x if inches.)

                                          ABRIDGED PRICE LIST.

                           Descriptioi*.

              Pearl 24ino.
    Special "g'uBncttUtftts.                         19

THE AIDS TO BIBLE STUDENTS

                                             iCST COMPLETED

Forms the Second Part of the VARIORUM and other

                 Queen's Printers' Teacher's Bibles.

THE Queen's Printers were the First to Issue what was known as tJie Sunday
      School Teacher's Bible in May, 1875. It was not until 16 months afterwards
that a Bible issued from the Oxford University Press, bearing on its title page
"The S. S. Teacher's Edition," and closely following the model of the Queen's
Printers' Teacher's Bible; this brief statement is Decessary to remove misunder-

standings.

    The success which attended the publioation of the Queen's Printers' Teacher's
Bible has been unprecedented. Over One Million Copies have been sold.

    This is no doubt due to the fact that "ULiit aiU? la JSiftU Sfutents" were from
the outset prepared with the utmost care, in order that the Student might have at
his disposal the Best and Surest information from the pen of the most Eminent

Authority on each of the various subjects treated.

    The cordial approval of the principle and contents of former editions by eminent
Biblical Scholars, and by the representa^tjves of all classes of Teachers throughout
the "World, has led to the enlargement of each suQcessive issue, in order to give to
the Student The Best, Most Reliable, and Most Recent information that could

be obtained.

    In the present issue, very considerable improvements and additions have been

made. The Articles have undergone a careful and thorough revision, and, pursuant to
recent discoveries, new matter has been added and the whole volume brought up to
date. The aifis will therefore be found more than ever Practically Useful,
Exhaustive in Treatment, and Complete in their character. Several new

Articles have been added.

   The Publication of the VARIORUM Bible, and of the Revised Version which
followed it, called popular a>ttentiou to the soiurces from which we have received the
Sacred Text, and the quotations in the VARIORUM Notes of Manuscripts, Versions,

Ancient Fathers, etc., have aroused a spirit of enquiry as to their relative importance.
To meet this, the Rev. Professor Swete has written for these AIDS a new Article

entitled.

The Bible : its History.-- In this Article, the Rev. Professor Swete places before the
        Student a summary of the most important results which have been reached by
        competent enquirers on such questions as the formation and transmission of the
       original Text, its Versions, Ancient and Modem, etc., etc.

The Bible and its Contents :-- Old Testament, a valuable summary and analysis
        of each Book by the Rev. Pixifesser Stanley Leathes, has been further expanded
        by Canon Girdlestone.

,,  The Apocrypha has been summarised and analysed by the Rev. Dr. Wright.

,,  The New Testament Article by Prof. W. Sanday will be found to contain

    the best results of modern New Testament Scholarship, and his Analyses of

    the Gospels and Epistles are simply invaluable.

    QBEAT -NEW STREET, LONDON, E.G.
     --                                            :

20       ^pccittt ^ubfimfionsr;

         AIDS TO BIBLE STUDENTS-conhmeed. .

             -- Among other important additions may be mentioned

Esferences in the New Testament to Passages in the Old, revised and

         extended by the Rev. Dr. Swete.

Hebrew Poetry, by Canon Girdlestone.
The Testimony of the Monuments to Old Testament History, by Mr. W. St.

       Chad Boscawen, who traces from the earliest times many corroborations of

         Bi}jle History from the Ancient DIonuments.

Metals and Precious Stones, by Professor N. Story Maslielyne, E.R.S.

Plants and Animals: Criticisms of their Identifications in the Revised Version,
        by the Kev. Canon Tristram, D.D., F.R.S.

Ethnology of the Bible.--This Article, treated in four riart.s, corresponding to
          four periods in Bible history, viz., the Patriarchal, tlie Davidic, of the Captivity,
         and of Christ and His Apostles, as well as the succeeding Article on

The Bible and the Monuments, or the Hebrews in their relations with the Oriental
         Monai'chies, have been re\'ised by the Rev. Professor Saj'ce.

The  Epitome of Bible History has been minutely revised ami extended by the
     -- Editor.
     It is now grouped under four divisions :  1.  The Period of the Promises
                                                                                                                                                                                              ;

     2. The Period of Expectation, or Between the Testaments ; 3. The Promises

     fulfilled; 4. The Establishment of the Kingdom of Christ, or the Apostolic

     History. The Tables alongside the Epitome give the dates of the events, and

     the references in Scripture.

The Glossary of Bible Words, in the Variorum Edition, has been revised and enlars-ed,
        and will be found very complete. It refers to the Authorised and Revised Ver-
        sions, with their marginal readings, and to the Variorum Notes; also to the
        Apocrypha. It also includes particular names of Plants, Animals, Metals, &c.,
        which formerly appeared under their individual articles, but are now inserted in

         the Glossary for ready reference.

The Supplementary Contents, or Key to Subjects, which indexes the names and

         words not treated alphabetically elsewhere, will be found of very great use to

          Teachers.

The Concordance (40,000 references) is added, also an Atlas of new Maps, with
         Index, revised and brought to most recent surveys.

     A List of some of the Contributors to the AIDS:

Rkv. PROFESSOR SWETE. D.D., Hegius Professor of Divinity, Cambridge.

Rev. professor STANLEY LEATHES, D.D., Professor of Hebrew, King's

            College, London, &c.

Rev. C. H. H. WRIGHT, D.D., Examiner in Hebrew, Universities of Oxford,

           Durham, and London.

Rev. professor W. SANDAY, D.D., LL.D., Dean Ireland's Professor of

             Exegesis. Oxford.

Rev. professor CHEYNE, D.D., Oriel Professor of Interpretation, Oxford;

           Canon of Rochester.

Rev. canon GIRDLESTONE, M.A., Hon. Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.
Rev. professor SAYCE, M.A., LL.D., Professor of Assyriology, Oxford.
Rev. canon TRISTRAM. D.D., LL.D., F.R.S., Durham.
Rev. S. G. GREEN, D.D., Co-Editor of the Revised English Bible.

Rev. C. H. HOLE, M.A., Co-Editor of " Smith's Dictionary of Christian Bio-

             graphy," &c.

PROFESSOR N. STORY MASKELYNE. M.A.. F.R.S.. Professor of Mineralogy
         in the University of Oxford ; Hon. Fellow of Wadham College, Oxford.

W. ST. CHAD BOSCAWEN, F.R.H.S.

Sir J. S'I}AINBU,'M..A.,Mus.Doc.,Professor of Music in the University of Oxford.

F. W. MADDEN, M.R.A.S., Author of "History of Jewish Coinage," &c.

         &c.                       &c.  &c.

     RETAIL OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

     MYRE ^ SFOTTISWOODE,
         Special '^uhUcalioixs.                        ii

         Wl\^ (^uttn^s Printers'

VARIORUM and other TEACHER'S BIBLES.

         OFiNioisrs ow the; ci^erg-y.

          The Archbishop of Canterbuet (Dr. Benson) :--

    The Archbishop said, at a Diocesan Conference :--'' I should like to call the atten-
tion of the Convocation to the New Edition of the ' Variorum Reference Bible.'
published by Messrs. Eyre and Spottiswoode. I will just read an account of what
it contains. The whole book has been revised. It was laid, I may say, befoi-e the

-- Lambeth Conference--the promise of it and now it is finished. The old edition

forms the basis of the new edition ; it is printed in larger type ; and every passage

which has been disputed by great scliolars as to its correct translation or rendering,

is marked by a figure before and after the sentence or word, these figures referring

to the foot-notes, which give the alternative renderings or readings, together with the

authorities for the same, abbreviated to save space. The collection of these notes

from (39 commentators for the Old Testament, and 7.3 for the New, has occupied

many years close study and preparation. The New Edition is much amplified as com-
pared with the old one, and you may like to know that the opinion of Dr. "Westcott
is that it is much the best edition of the kind that has appeared."

         The LATE Archbishop of York (Dr. Thomson):--

A "The names of the authors guarantee its excellence.  miniature library of

illustrative matter. If such a book is carefully and generally used, there must

be a great improvement in Bible knowledge in this generation. The critical matter

at the foot of the columns is remarkably complete. The last feature gives it special

value."

         The late Archbishop of Armagh:--

    "I have carefully examined the 'Variorum Teacher's Bible' published b.v Messrs.
Eyre and Spottiswoode. The varied and valuable amount of information it contains
is most remarkable. There are few subjects connected with the Bible left un-
elucidated. The Student of the Bible will find the Variorum Edition a treasury replete
with instruction."

         The Bishop of Durham (Dr. Westcott) :--

    "Admirably done. I constantly use it."

          The Bishop of Limerick:--

    "The Variorum (Teacher's) Bible, with its ReCerenees, Concordance, Various Read-
ings and Renderings, and supplemented by its Aids to Students, serves as a Biblical
Encyclopedia, useful by its compactness and the value of its contents, to Biblical

Students of all grades."

          The Bishop of Exeter (Dr. Bickersteth) :--
   "I am much gratified with it . . . eminently fitted for teachers, and all who
desire in a clear and compendious form very full information respecting the sacred

Scriptures.

    "A most valuable work, and will greatly enrich the library of Biblical Students.''

          The Bishop op Lladtdaff:-
   "An immense amount of information, a great help to Teachers, and to Bible

readers generally.

    " The names guarantee the value of the information. I trust it will be largely

circulated."

          The Bishop op St. David's (Dr. W. Basil Jones) :--

    "I have delayed . . . until I could find more time to look into the volume; it
contains so large an amount and variety of matter in a very small space. But its

contents appear to me of the highest value and admirable in arrangement. I would

refer especially to the various Readings and Renderings in the foot-notes."

         GREAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.G.
'2i                                                               Special 'publications.

          The Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol:--
   " A very valuable work, well suited for those for whom it is designed, and for all

earnest students."

          The Bishop of Liverpool:--

    " I admire it very much, and think it a most valuable edition of the Holy
Scriptures. I shall be glad to recommend your work."

         The Bishop of Wakefield (Dr. Walsham How) :--

    "I have carefully examined the (Variorum) Teacher's Bible published by Messrs.
Eyre and Spottiswoode, and I consider it a most valuable work. Believing that the

Bible is its own best interpreter, I am sure that the aids to an intelligent under-
standing of the text itself, together with the assistance given to students who desire to

have an accurate conception of the purest form of that test, will prove of inestimable

service to all Bible readers."

         The Bishop of Down and Connor :--

    "I consider the Variorum Teacher's Bible highly useful both to Teachers and
Students. The various readings in the foot-notes largely increase its usefulness,
placing before the professional Student an amoucut of information and research,
which to many would otherwise be inaccessible."

          The Bishop of Cork: --

    "The eminent names of those -who have contributed Articles to the Teacher's
Aids are a guarantee for the accuracy of the information, which will be found most
valuable to those who wish to understand or teach^ or first to understand and then to
teach, and help to provide that skilled and accurate teaching, which is not only the
true antidote to prevalent unbelief, but the great preventive of it."

     The Bishop of Killaloe (Dr. Fitzgerald) :--

    "I find it to be a most perfect compendium of information on almost every

Biblical matter that could be comprised within such a compass, and it seems
marvellous how much has been introduced and how varied the topics. It will, I

am sure, prove a most important aid to Clergymen, Sunday School Teachers, and
many others, and I hope to avail myself of it yet in that direction."

       The Bishop of Tuam: --

" I admire greiatly the most valuable contents."

     The Bishop of Kilmore (Dr. Darlet) :--

... " I have looked through it carefijlly                                                  a most valuable e;dition of the sacred

Scriptures. The Variorum foot-notes represent much critical research, very carefully

arranged                                           the  Aids  to  Bible  Students contain  a mass  of interesting  information  in  a
                                                ;

convenient form ; useful alike to Teachers and Students."

          The Bishop of Ossorj::--

   "I feel pleasure in bearing my testimony.
   " An invaluable aid both to Clergymen and Teachers, and a marvel of cheapness.

The more I have examined it, the more thoroughly have I been satisfied and

pleased."

          The Right REy. Bishop Barry :--
    "For the study of the Text is invaluable."

          The Dean of Salisbury:--
   " I am fully sensible of the great boon yoa have put within the reach of
Bible students and it -will be my endeavour to promote the knowledge of this

valuable edition."

          The Dean of Ely:--
    " I hope to make use of it, with its various adjuncts of Not.es, Readings," &c., &c.

          The De4n of Lincoln :--
    "The work will be extremely useful."

          The Dean of Rochester (late Master of Balliol College, Oxford) :--
   "A great achievement of toil and thought."

                                                                  :E¥BE--^ BFOTTI8W00DE,
:

   Special '^uhlxcaiions.        23

          The (lath) Dean of St. Paul's (Dr. Chuech) :--
    "A wonderful digest of leavninf?. The names of the various scholars are, of

course, warrant of care and accuracy, and certainly nothing so complete and com-
prehensive, in such a compass, has ever before been attempted."

          The Dean op Peterborough:--
   "Tour Bible strikes me as admirable in every respect. The Various Renderings
considerably enhance the value of the work. It will give me very great pleasure to
do all in my power to promote the circulation. I know of no one volume to be
compared to it for the amount of information it conveys."

          The Dean of Norwich (Dr. W. Lefrot, D.D.) :--

    "There is no work of the kind comparable to this work. It is invaluable."

        -- The Vert Rev. Db. Vaughan, l>e«» of Llandaff, and (late) blaster of the
                  Temple
    "I use the Variorum Teacher's Bible with pleasure and profit."

          The Dean of Lichfield:--
    "I am both surprised and delighted at the fulness and accuracy of information

to be found in it.
    " I will gladly mention it with the approbattion which it so well deserves.

          The Vert Rev. Dr. Butler, Master of Trinity College, Cambridge .--
   "A great achievement."

          The Ven. Archdeacon Farrar:--
   " It lies always on my desk. I place a high value upon it."

          The late Ven. AkchCeacon Hesset:--
    "Students of the sacred volume will owe a deep debt to the projectors and

producers."

          The Rev. Canon Bodt:--

     " Very well done."

         The Rev. Canon Knox Little':--
    "Most useful and helpful,"

          The Rev. Dr. Wace, of King's College:-^
   " A work of incalculable usefulness."

          The late Rev. Dr. Edersheim f--

    " It is certainly the best, most complete and useful which has hitherto appeared."

          The Rbv. Dr. Samuel G. Green:--
    "As a companion to the Revised Version it is invaluable."

           Dr. Salmond, of Free Cotleffe. Aberdeen .--
    " I trust it may secure a very wide circulation. The former edition has come to
he a familiar book amdng our students."

         The Rev. Hugh Price Hughes :--

     "Incomparable and invaluable."

       -- Dr. Greenwood, Victoria University {Owen's College), Manchester:

    "Its merits aind remarkable features are already known to me."

          The Rev. Joseph Parker, D.D.:--

     " I have examined your Bible with great care. It is quite as valuable for
preachers and hearers as for Teachers and scholars.

     " It is almost a library in itself, containing everything that is iilnmediilttely needed
for the elucidation of the sacred text."

          The Bishop of Ontario:--
   "My opinion 6f it is nothing so good has hitherto appeared. It is admirably
adapted for its purpose of a'ssisfing Teachers, and Cannot fail to be appreciated by
all who are' really anxious to find the best instruction in the sacred volume."

          The Rev. J. H. Vincent, of Cfiautauqua :--
    "The book is indeed A marvel, a library of learning, a book of books, concerning
the 'Book of Books,' and deserves a wide circulation in Europe and America."

QBEAT. NEWSTEJEET, LONDON, E.G.
              .

          24     Special "^ublicaftotts

          SPECIAL EDITION (Lessons Marked in Red), Persian Levant,

           handsomely tooled, bevelled boards, red under gold edges, £1 16s. net.

     Tlie Royal Uo. Bible and Apocrypha, with Marginal Maries, printed in reel,
                     indicating the Sunday, Holy-day, and Daily Lessons.

                 The Lessons proper for Sundays arc marked thus, in red.

                 L. 1st Sunday in Advent. Morn.                             J

                 The Lessons proper for Holy-days are marked thus, in red.

                 \^ St. Michael, 1st Lesson. Morn. ,^^^^.^,^^.^,^^^,^,^^^^^^^^^^^^^,^

                 The Daily Lessons are marked thus, in red.

                 \_ January 9, Even.                                        y

          A Calendar to correspond, shows (also at a glance) the pages on which the

                 Lessons occur, thus rendering mistake impossible.

[printed in      This system of Makkino leaves the Text untouched.

     RED.]
NOW rr r
g<0 M                  after the death of Moses the
HCK  P    c      servant of the Lord it came to pass,
          Op
     CD

     fl)
B fcr p that the Lord spake unto Joshua the son

    o' *         of Nun, Moses' mhiister, sayhig,
PP
                  2 Moses my servant is dead ; now there-

                 fore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and

     S" o all this people, unto the land which I do

                 give to them, even to the children of Israel.

                3 Every place that the sole of your foot
          K shall tread upon, that have I given unto

                 you, as I said unto Moses.

                  4 From the Avilderness and this Leba-

                 non even unto the great river, the river

                 Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites,

                 and unto the great sea toward the going

C^osjn for Mtstminster |ibbrj> ; l^cbk CoUcgt, ©xioxh ; anb 1800 Cljiirtbcs anb Ciatbcbrals.
                       Bound in Calf, Morocco, or Levant, prices £3 and upwards.

                 EYUE 3f 8P0TTISW00DE,
                              ;                                      .

         Special "j^ubltcafiotts.                                                  35

                   THE

Family Bible

        WITH COMMENTARY,

         §U ^Oimne. ^XlC         {Size, 13 X 11 X 3 inches.)

With MARGINAL REFERENCES, CONCORDANCE, and INTRODUCTION.

          This work is designed to supply the information needful to an
                            intelligent study of the Holy Scriptures.

In Nineteen Thousand Concise Notes

         IT GIVES, IN LARGE TYPE,

--A I.  selection from the Various Readings and Translations of the Text.

-- II. Explanations of the difficult AVords, Phrases, and Passages.

-- III. Illustrations, archaeological, historical, topographical, from Oriental

               customs, &c.

-- IV. Homiletical comments, original, and selected from Matthew Henry's and

        similar Commentaries

                                 AND CONTAINS

         TWELVE STEEL ENGRAVINGS

Of the Principal PLACES OF INTEREST in tlie HOLY LAND.

                              price: s.

CB 0.   Cloth, gilt edges                                          under           s. d.
CB 2.   Leather, gilt sides and back                                               21
CB 12.                                                                          .  31 6
CB 14.  Turkey Morocco                                                             47 6
        Turkey Morocco, bevelled boards, best, flexible back, red
CB 15.                                                                             60
           gold edges                                                              70
        Best Levant, cushioned boards, solid red under gold edges

         retaiij op all booksellers.

         GREAT NEW STREET, LONDON, E.G.

S 2764.                                                                 Y
26  Special "^wbltcattons.

                          POPULAR EDITION OF

THE STANDARD BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER, 1662.

  THE ANNEXED BOOK IN TYPE,

    An exact copy, in type, of the Manuscript Book of Common Prayer which

was an7iexecl, as the authoritative record, to the Act of Uniformity of 1662.
     In 1891, by special permission of the House of Lords (now the custodians

of the MS. Book), H.M. Printers produced by photolithography a facsimile
of this " Annexed Book," but the work was necessarily too costly for the
majority of Churchmen.

    To the Type-Edition are appended (I.) A List of Erasures and Corrections
A in the MS. Book. (II.) Collation of the MS. Book with " the Convocation
A Copy "from which it purports to be fairly written. (III.) Collation with the

Authorised Version of Quotations therefrom inserted in the Annexed Book.

Royal 8vo., Cloth, Bevelled Boards, Red Burnished

                            Edges, price 10s. 6d.

  THE HISTORICAL PRAYER BOOK:

BEING THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER WITH THE SOURCE OF EACH COMPONENT
       PART AND THE DATE AT WHICH IT WAS INCORPORATED IN THE
                                 BOOK STATED IN THE MARGIN.

         Edited ty the Rev. JAMES CORNFORD, M.A.,

                            Lecturer at the London College of Divinity.

SPECIALLY PREPARED FOR THE USE OP STUDENTS AND ALL
             MEMBERS OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH.

                Clotli, Hed Edges, 5/-

                    so]m:e ofin"ions.

  -- Glolje. "The system adopted is excellent."
  -- Guardian. " The work has been done most carefully."

    Record.--" Welcome to the student of the Prayer Book, or to the avenia;e

-- Churchman."
    Leeds Mercury. " The edition will be of great use."
                              Commended also by The Times, &c., &c.

             RETAIL OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                  EYRE ^ 8P0TTISW00DE,
                                 ^pcciat "j^ublicatiotti

              FIFTEENTH EDITION.

                THE

dueen's Printers' Teacher's Prayer Book:

 BEING THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER, with INTRODUCTIONS,
   ANALYSES, NOTES, and a C0M3IENTARY UPON THE PSALTER.

Right Rev. ALFRED BARRY, U.U.,

                                                Canon of Windsor,
   Late Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan Primate ofAustralia and Tasmania ;

    GLOSSARY by the Rev. A. L. MAYHEW, M.A.

    The '* ©crtcljer'a H^va^x^v; ^c»crk," now so well known, is the only
work of the kind published in a popular form at popular prices. It is issued
in two sizes, 24mo. and 16mo., and in various bindings {see School Edition and

Prices below).

     In the arrangement of the work the most simple plan has been adopted,
the Prayer Book and its explanation being interpaged throughout ; and the
work of Dr. Barry as Editor makes it of such standard value as to entitle it
to rank as a companion volume to the Queen's Printers' " Teacher's Bibles."

                                                              24mo.

                                                              EDITION.

                                                              s. d.

Cloth boards, red edges                                       :i  ti
Leather, limp, gilt edges
Leather, round corners, red under gold edges, and gold I'oll  4 (i

       inside cover                                           7
Polished Persian Calf, limp, round corners, red under gold

     edges, and gold roll inside cover
Morocco, limp, gilt edges
Morocco, boards, gilt edges

Morocco, circuit
Morocco, limp, round comers, red under gold edges, and gold

      roll inside cover
Special 'g'ublicaftons.

    A. SELECT

of mUe Morbs

Mort)0 anb phraeee in tbe prater 'Boo\{.

      With References to the Text and Illustrative Passages from English

                Classical Authors, containing obsolete expressions, especially
                        in Psalms, as well as Theological, Ecclesiastical,
                             and Liturgical Terms, with Explanations
                                                and Etymologies,

  By Rev. A. L. MAYHEW, M.A.,

                             Chaplain, of Wadham College, Oxford.

                              x>ric:e: s.

Cloth, gilt edses                                           2/-
Paste Grain Roan, gilt edges                                3/-
Morocco, limp, gilt edges                                   7/6

LARGE TYPE. For the Aged and Infirm.

THE PSALTER with COMMENTARY,

                                                      BY

 Tlie Higlit Rev. ALFRED BARHY, D.3D.

                                         Size, 8| X 7 X 1 inches.

-- -- The Introdiiction to the Psalter is included, the main purpose of which
   as prefatory to the special annotations on each Psalm is to examine the
"eneral character, style, and structure of the Psalter, especially in relation to
its use in the service of the Church in all ages.

lPx<ices a.ncl ^ix&dixi^s.

Cloth boai'ds, red edges, burnished                                            3/6
Leather, round corners, red under gold edges                                   7/6
Turkey Morocco, limp, ditto, ditto, gold roll inside cover  - - - 12/6

RETAIL OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

EYBE 3f SPOTTISWOOJDEf

                                                            1G5
Date Due
^WOF            /

^ RFo 03 ,c)34
